## Abel Prize
TheAbel Prize(/ˈɑːbəl/AH-bəl;Norwegian:Abelprisen[ˈɑ̀ːbl̩ˌpriːsn̩]) is awarded annually by theKing of Norwayto one or more outstandingmathematicians.[1]It is named after the Norwegian mathematicianNiels Henrik Abel(1802–1829) and directly modeled after theNobel Prizes;[2][3][4][5][6][7][8]as such, it is sometimes considered theNobel Prize of mathematics.[9]It comes with a medal and a monetary award of 7.5 millionNorwegian kroner(NOK, aboutUS$873,000in 2026; increased from 6 million NOK in 2019).
The Abel Prize's history dates back to 1899, when its establishment was proposed by the Norwegian mathematicianSophus Liewhen he learned thatAlfred Nobel's plans for annual prizeswould not include a prize in mathematics. In 1902,King Oscar II of Sweden and Norwayindicated his willingness to finance the creation of a mathematics prize to complement the Nobel Prizes, but the establishment of the prize was prevented by thedissolution of the union between Norway and Swedenin 1905. It took almost a century before the prize was finally established by the Government of Norway in 2001, and it was specifically intended "to give the mathematicians their own equivalent of a Nobel Prize."[7]The laureates are selected by the Abel Committee, the members of whom are appointed by theNorwegian Academy of Science and Letters.
The award ceremony takes place in theaulaof theUniversity of Oslo, where theNobel Peace Prizewas awarded between 1947 and 1989.[10]The Abel Prize board has also established an Abel symposium, administered by theNorwegian Mathematical Society, which takes place twice a year.[11]

## History
The prize was first proposed in 1899, to be part of the celebration of the 100th anniversary ofNiels Henrik Abel's birth in 1802.[12]The Norwegian mathematicianSophus Lieproposed establishing an Abel Prize when he learned thatAlfred Nobel's plans for annual prizes would not include a prize in mathematics.King Oscar IIwas willing to finance a mathematics prize in 1902, and the mathematiciansLudwig SylowandCarl Størmerdrew up statutes and rules for the proposed prize. However, Lie's influence decreased after his death, and thedissolution of the union between Sweden and Norwayin 1905 ended the first attempt to create an Abel Prize.[12]
After interest in the concept of the prize had risen in 2001, a working group was formed to develop a proposal, which was presented to the Prime Minister of Norway in May. In August 2001, the Norwegian government announced that the prize would be awarded beginning in 2002, the two-hundredth anniversary of Abel's birth.Atle Selbergreceived an honorary Abel Prize in 2002, but the first actual Abel Prize was awarded in 2003.[12][13]
A book series presenting Abel Prize laureates and their research was commenced in 2010. The first three volumes cover the years 2003–2007, 2008–2012, and 2013–2017 respectively.[14][15][16]
In 2019,Karen Uhlenbeckbecame the first woman to win the Abel Prize, with the award committee citing "the fundamental impact of her work on analysis, geometry and mathematical physics.[17]TheBernt Michael HolmboeMemorial Prize was created in 2005. Named after Abel's teacher, it promotes excellence in teaching.[18]

## Selection criteria and funding
Anyone may submit a nomination for the Abel Prize, although self-nominations are not permitted. The nominee must be alive. If the awardee dies after being declared the winner, the prize will be awarded posthumously.
TheNorwegian Academy of Science and Lettersdeclares the winner of the Abel Prize each March after recommendation by the Abel Committee, which consists of five leading mathematicians. Both Norwegians and non-Norwegians may serve on the Committee. They are elected by the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters and nominated by theInternational Mathematical Unionand theEuropean Mathematical Society.[12][19]

## Funding
The Norwegian Government gave the prize an initial funding of NOK 200 million (about €21.7 million[20]) in 2001. Previously, the funding came from the Abel foundation, but today the prize is financed directly through the national budget.
The funding is controlled by the Board, which consists of members elected by the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters.[19]The current board consists ofIngrid Kristine Glad(chair), Aslak Bakke Buan, Helge K. Dahle,Kristin Vinje, Cordian Riener and Gunn Elisabeth Birkelund.[21]

## Distribution by country and proportion of dual nationals
As for 2025, 11 out of 26 recipients were dual nationals.