## Abstract expressionism
Abstract expressionismin the United States emerged as a distinctart movementin theaftermath of World War IIand gained mainstream acceptance in the 1950s, a shift from the Americansocial realismof the 1930s influenced by theGreat DepressionandMexican muralists.[1][2]The term was first applied to American art in 1946 by the art criticRobert Coates. Key figures in theNew York School, which was the center of this movement, included such artists asArshile Gorky,Jackson Pollock,Franz Kline,Mark Rothko,Norman Lewis,Willem de Kooning,Adolph Gottlieb,Clyfford Still,Robert Motherwell,Theodoros Stamos,Jack Tworkov, andLee Krasneramong others.
The movement was not limited to painting but included influential collagists and sculptors, such asDavid Smith,Louise Nevelson, and others. Abstract expressionism was notably influenced by the spontaneous andsubconsciouscreation methods ofSurrealistartists likeAndré MassonandMax Ernst. Artists associated with the movement combined the emotional intensity ofGerman Expressionismwith the radical visual vocabularies of Europeanavant-gardeschools likeFuturism, theBauhaus, andSynthetic Cubism.
Abstract expressionism was seen as rebellious and idiosyncratic, encompassing various artistic styles. It was the first specifically American movement to achieve international influence and put New York City at the center of the Westernart world, a role formerly filled byParis. Contemporary art critics played a significant role in its development. Critics likeClement GreenbergandHarold Rosenbergpromoted the work of artists associated with abstract expressionism, in particular Jackson Pollock, through their writing and collecting. Rosenberg's concept of the canvas as an "arena in which to act" was pivotal in defining the approach ofaction painters. The cultural reign of abstract expressionism in the United States had diminished by the early 1960s, while the subsequent rejection of the abstract expressionist emphasis on individualism led to the development of such movements asPop artandMinimalism.[3]Throughout the second half of the 20th century, the influence of abstract expressionism can be seen in diverse movements in the U.S. and Europe, includingTachismeandNeo-expressionism, among others.
The term "abstract expressionism" is believed to have first been used in Germany in 1919 in the magazineDer Sturmin reference to German Expressionism.Alfred Barrused this term in 1929 to describe works byWassily Kandinsky.[4]The term was used in the United States in 1946 byRobert Coatesin his review of 18Hans Hofmannpaintings.[5][6]

## Style
An important predecessor isSurrealism, with its emphasis on spontaneous,automatic, or subconscious creation.Jackson Pollock's dripping paint onto a canvas laid on the floor is a technique that has its roots in the work ofAndré Masson,Max Ernst, andDavid Alfaro Siqueiros. The newer research tends to put the exile-surrealistWolfgang Paalenin the position of the artist and theoretician who fostered the theory of the viewer-dependent possibility space through his paintings and his magazineDYN. Paalen considered ideas ofquantum mechanics, as well as idiosyncratic interpretations of the totemic vision and the spatial structure of native-Indian painting fromBritish Columbiaand prepared the ground for the new spatial vision of the young American abstracts. His long essayTotem Art(1943) had considerable influence on such artists asMartha Graham,Isamu Noguchi,Pollock,Mark RothkoandBarnett Newman.[7]Around 1944 Barnett Newman tried to explain America's newest art movement and included a list of "the men in the new movement". Paalen is mentioned twice; other artists mentioned are Gottlieb, Rothko, Pollock, Hofmann, Baziotes,Gorkyand others.Robert Motherwellis mentioned with a question mark.[8]Another important early manifestation of what came to be abstract expressionism is the work of American Northwest artistMark Tobey, especially his "white writing" canvases, which, though generally not large in scale, anticipate the"all-over"look of Pollock's drip paintings.
The movement's name is derived from the combination of the emotional intensity andself-denialof the GermanExpressionistswith the anti-figurative aesthetic of the European abstract schools such asFuturism, theBauhaus, and SyntheticCubism. Additionally, it has an image of being rebellious, anarchic, highly idiosyncratic and, some feel, nihilistic.[9]In practice, the term is applied to any number of artists working (mostly) in New York who had quite different styles, and even to work that is neither especially abstract nor expressionist. California abstract expressionistJay Meuser, who typically painted in the non-objective style, wrote about his paintingMare Nostrum, "It is far better to capture the glorious spirit of the sea than to paint all of its tiny ripples." Pollock's energetic "action paintings", with their "busy" feel, are different, both technically and aesthetically, from the violent and grotesqueWomenseries ofWillem de Kooning'sfigurative paintingsand the rectangles of color in Rothko'sColor Fieldpaintings (which are not what would usually be called expressionist, and which Rothko denied were abstract). Yet all four artists are classified as abstract expressionists.
Abstract expressionism has many stylistic similarities to the Russian artists of the early 20th century such asWassily Kandinsky. Although it is true that spontaneity or the impression of spontaneity characterized many of the abstract expressionists' works, most of these paintings involved careful planning, especially since their large size demanded it. With artists such asPaul Klee, Kandinsky,Emma Kunz, and later on Rothko, Newman, andAgnes Martin, abstract art clearly implied expression of ideas concerning the spiritual, the unconscious, and the mind.[10]
Why this style gained mainstream acceptance in the 1950s is a matter of debate. Americansocial realismhad been the mainstream in the 1930s. It had been influenced not only by theGreat Depression, but also by theMexican muralistssuch asDavid Alfaro SiqueirosandDiego Rivera. The political climate after World War II did not long tolerate the social protests of these painters. Abstract expressionism arose during the war and began to be showcased during the early forties at galleries in New York such asThe Art of This Century Gallery. The post-warMcCarthy erawas a time of artistic censorship in the United States, but if the subject matter were totallyabstractthen it would be seen as apolitical, and therefore safe. Or if the art was political, the message was largely for the insiders.[11]
While the movement is closely associated with painting,collagistAnne Ryanand certain sculptors in particular were also integral to abstract expressionism.[12]David Smith, and his wifeDorothy Dehner,Herbert Ferber,Isamu Noguchi,Ibram Lassaw,Theodore Roszak,Phillip Pavia,Mary Callery, Richard Stankiewicz,Louise Bourgeois, andLouise Nevelsonin particular were some of the sculptors considered as being important members of the movement. In addition, the artistsDavid Hare,John Chamberlain,James Rosati,Mark di Suvero, and sculptorsRichard Lippold, Raoul Hague,George Rickey,Reuben Nakian, and evenTony Smith,Seymour Lipton,Joseph Cornell, and several others[13]were integral parts of the abstract expressionist movement. Many of the sculptors listed participated in theNinth Street Show,[13]a famous exhibition curated byLeo Castellion East Ninth Street in New York City in 1951. Besides the painters and sculptors of the period theNew York Schoolof abstract expressionism also generated a number of supportive poets, includingFrank O'Haraand photographers such asAaron SiskindandFred McDarrah, (whose bookThe Artist's World in Picturesdocumented the New York School during the 1950s), and filmmakers—notablyRobert Frank—as well.
Although the abstract expressionist school spread quickly throughout the United States, the epicenters of this style were New York City and theSan Francisco Bay areaof California.

## Art critics of the post–World War II era
At a certain moment the canvas began to appear to one American painter after another as an arena in which to act. What was to go on the canvas was not a picture but an event.
—Harold Rosenberg[14]
In the 1940s there were not only few galleries (The Art of This Century,Pierre MatisseGallery,Julien Levy Galleryand a few others) but also few critics who were willing to follow the work of the New York Vanguard.
There were also a few artists with a literary background, among them Robert Motherwell andBarnett Newman, who functioned as critics as well.
While the New Yorkavant-gardewas still relatively unknown by the late 1940s, most of the artists who have become household names today had their well-established patron critics:Clement GreenbergadvocatedJackson Pollockand theColor Fieldpainters likeClyfford Still,Mark Rothko,Barnett Newman,Adolph GottliebandHans Hofmann;Harold Rosenbergseemed to prefer the action painters such asWillem de KooningandFranz Kline, as well as the seminal paintings ofArshile Gorky; Thomas B. Hess, the managing editor ofARTnews, championedWillem de Kooning.
The new critics elevated their protégés by casting other artists as "followers"[15]or ignoring those who did not serve their promotional goal.
In 1958,Mark Tobeybecame the first American painter sinceWhistler(1895) to win top prize at theVenice Biennale.[16]
Barnett Newman, a late member of theUptown Group, wrote catalogue forewords and reviews, and by the late 1940s became an exhibiting artist atBetty Parsons Gallery. His first solo show was in 1948. Soon after his first exhibition, Barnett Newman remarked in one of the Artists' Sessions at Studio 35: "We are in the process of making the world, to a certain extent, in our own image."[17]Using his writing skills, Newman fought every step of the way to reinforce his newly established image as an artist and to promote his work. An example is his letter on April 9, 1955, "Letter toSidney Janis: — it is true that Rothko talks the fighter. He fights, however, to submit to the philistine world. My struggle against bourgeois society has involved the total rejection of it."[18]
Strangely, the person thought to have had most to do with the promotion of this style was a New York Trotskyist: Clement Greenberg. As long-time art critic for thePartisan ReviewandThe Nation, he became an early and literate proponent of abstract expressionism. The well-heeled artist Robert Motherwell joined Greenberg in promoting a style that fit the political climate and the intellectual rebelliousness of the era.
Greenberg proclaimed abstract expressionism and Pollock in particular as the epitome of aesthetic value. He supported Pollock's work on formalistic grounds as simply the best painting of its day and the culmination of an art tradition going back viaCubismandCézannetoMonet, in which painting became ever-'purer' and more concentrated in what was 'essential' to it, the making of marks on a flat surface.[19]
Pollock's work has always polarised critics. Rosenberg spoke of the transformation of painting into an existential drama in Pollock's work, in which "what was to go on the canvas was not a picture but an event". "The big moment came when it was decided to paint 'just to paint'. The gesture on the canvas was a gesture of liberation from value—political, aesthetic, moral."[20]
One of the most vocal critics of abstract expressionism at the time wasThe New York Timesart criticJohn Canaday.Meyer SchapiroandLeo Steinbergalong with Greenberg and Rosenberg were important art historians of the post-war era who voiced support for abstract expressionism. During the early-to-mid 1960s younger art criticsMichael Fried,Rosalind Krauss, andRobert Hughesadded considerable insights into the critical dialectic that continues to grow around abstract expressionism.

## World War II and the Post-War period
During the period leading up to and during World War II, modernist artists, writers, and poets, as well as important collectors and dealers, fled Europe and the onslaught of theNazisfor safe haven in the United States. Many of those who didn't flee perished. Among the artists and collectors who arrived in New York during the war (some with help fromVarian Fry) wereHans Namuth,Yves Tanguy,Kay Sage,Max Ernst,Jimmy Ernst,Peggy Guggenheim,Leo Castelli,Marcel Duchamp,André Masson,Roberto Matta,André Breton,Marc Chagall,Jacques Lipchitz,Fernand Léger, andPiet Mondrian. A few artists, notablyPicasso,Matisse, andPierre Bonnardremained in France and survived.
The post-war period left the capitals of Europe in upheaval, with an urgency to economically and physically rebuild and to politically regroup. In Paris, formerly the center of European culture and capital of the art world, the climate for art was a disaster, and New York replaced Paris as the new center of the art world. Post-war Europe saw the continuation ofSurrealism,Cubism,Dada, and the works of Matisse. Also in Europe,Art brut,[21]andLyrical AbstractionorTachisme(the European equivalent to abstract expressionism) took hold of the newest generation.Serge Poliakoff,Nicolas de Staël,Georges Mathieu,Vieira da Silva,Jean Dubuffet,Yves Klein,Pierre SoulagesandJean Messagier, among others are considered important figures in post-war European painting.[22]In the United States, a new generation of American artists began to emerge and to dominate the world stage, and they were calledabstract expressionists.

## Gorky, Hofmann, and Graham
The 1940s in New York City heralded the triumph of American abstract expressionism, a modernist movement that combined lessons learned from Matisse, Picasso, Surrealism,Miró,Cubism,Fauvism, and early Modernism via eminent educators in the United States, including Hans Hofmann from Germany and John D. Graham from Ukraine. Graham's influence on American art during the early 1940s was particularly visible in the work of Gorky, de Kooning, Pollock, andRichard Pousette-Dartamong others. Gorky's contributions to American and world art are difficult to overestimate. His work aslyrical abstraction[24][25][26][27][28]was a "new language.[24]He "lit the way for two generations of American artists".[24]The painterly spontaneity of mature works such asThe Liver Is the Cock's Comb,The Betrothal II, andOne Year the Milkweedimmediately prefigured Abstract expressionism, and leaders in theNew York Schoolhave acknowledged Gorky's considerable influence. The early work ofHyman Bloomwas also influential.[29]American artists also benefited from the presence ofPiet Mondrian,Fernand Léger, Max Ernst, and theAndré Bretongroup,Pierre Matisse's gallery, andPeggy Guggenheim's galleryThe Art of This Century, as well as other factors. Hans Hofmann in particular as teacher, mentor, and artist was both important and influential to the development and success of abstract expressionism in the United States. Among Hofmann's protégés wasClement Greenberg, who became an enormously influential voice for American painting, and among his students wasLee Krasner, who introduced her teacher, Hofmann, to her husband, Jackson Pollock.[30]

## Pollock and Abstract influences
During the late 1940s, Jackson Pollock's radical approach to painting revolutionized the potential for allContemporary artthat followed him. To some extent, Pollock realized that the journey toward making a work of art was as important as the work of art itself. LikePicasso's innovative reinventions of painting and sculpture near the turn of the century viaCubismand constructed sculpture, with influences as disparate asNavajosand paintings, surrealism, Jungian analysis, and Mexican mural art,[31]Pollock redefined what it was to produce art. His move away from easel painting and conventionality was a liberating signal to the artists of his era and to all that came after. Artists realized that Jackson Pollock's process—the placing of unstretched rawcanvason the floor where it could be attacked from all four sides using artist materials and industrial materials; linear skeins of paint dripped and thrown; drawing, staining, brushing; imagery and non-imagery—essentially took art-making beyond any prior boundary. Abstract expressionism in general expanded and developed the definitions and possibilities that artists had available for the creation of new works of art.
The other abstract expressionists followed Pollock's breakthrough with new breakthroughs of their own. In a sense the innovations of Pollock,de Kooning,Franz Kline,Rothko,Philip Guston,Hans Hofmann,Clyfford Still,Barnett Newman,Ad Reinhardt,Richard Pousette-Dart,Robert Motherwell,Peter Voulkos, and others opened the floodgates to the diversity and scope of all the art that followed them.  The radical Anti-Formalist movements of the 1960s and 1970s includingFluxus,Neo-Dada,Conceptual art, and thefeminist art movementcan be traced to the innovations of abstract expressionism. Rereadings into abstract art, done by art historians such asLinda Nochlin,[32]Griselda Pollock[33]andCatherine de Zegher[34]critically shows, however, that pioneer women artists who have produced major innovations in modern art had been ignored by the official accounts of its history, but finally began to achieve long overdue recognition in the wake of the abstract expressionist movement of the 1940s and 1950s. Abstract expressionism emerged as a major art movement in New York City during the 1950s and thereafter several leading art galleries began to include the abstract expressionists in exhibitions and as regulars in their rosters. Some of those prominent 'uptown' galleries included: theCharles Egan Gallery,[35]theSidney Janis Gallery,[36]theBetty Parsons Gallery,[37]theKootz Gallery,[38]theTibor de Nagy Gallery, theStable Gallery, theLeo Castelli Galleryas well as others; and several downtown galleries known at the time as theTenth Street galleriesexhibited many emerging younger artists working in the abstract expressionist vein.

## Action painting
Action painting was a style widespread from the 1940s until the early 1960s, and is closely associated with abstract expressionism (some critics have used the termsaction paintingand abstract expressionism interchangeably). A comparison is often drawn between the American action painting and the Frenchtachisme.
The term was coined by the American criticHarold Rosenbergin 1952[39]and signaled a major shift in the aesthetic perspective ofNew York Schoolpainters and critics. According to Rosenberg the canvas was "an arena in which to act". While abstract expressionists such asJackson Pollock,Franz KlineandWillem de Kooninghad long been outspoken in their view of a painting as an arena within which to come to terms with the act of creation, earlier critics sympathetic to their cause, likeClement Greenberg, focused on their works' "objectness". To Greenberg, it was the physicality of the paintings' clotted and oil-caked surfaces that was the key to understanding them as documents of the artists'existentialstruggle.
Rosenberg's critique shifted the emphasis from the object to the struggle itself, with the finished painting being only the physical manifestation, a kind of residue, of the actual work of art, which was in the act or process of the painting's creation. This spontaneous activity was the "action" of the painter, through arm and wrist movement,painterlygestures, brushstrokes, thrown paint, splashed, stained, scumbled and dripped. The painter would sometimes let the paint drip onto the canvas, while rhythmically dancing, or even standing in the canvas, sometimes letting the paint fall according to the subconscious mind, thus letting theunconsciouspart of thepsycheassert and express itself. All this, however, is difficult to explain or interpret because it is a supposed unconscious manifestation of the act of pure creation.[40]
In practice, the term abstract expressionism is applied to any number of artists working (mostly) in New York who had quite different styles, and even applied to work which is not especially abstract nor expressionist. Pollock's energeticaction paintings, with their "busy" feel, are different both technically and aesthetically, to De Kooning's violent and grotesqueWomenseries.Woman Vis one of a series of six paintings made by de Kooning between 1950 and 1953 that depict a three-quarter-length female figure. He began the first of these paintings,Woman I, in June 1950, repeatedly changing and painting out the image until January or February 1952, when the painting was abandoned unfinished. The art historianMeyer Schapirosaw the painting in de Kooning's studio soon afterwards and encouraged the artist to persist. De Kooning's response was to begin three other paintings on the same theme;Woman II,Woman IIIandWoman IV. During the summer of 1952, spent atEast Hampton, de Kooning further explored the theme through drawings and pastels. He may have finished work onWoman Iby the end of June, or possibly as late as November 1952, and probably the other three women pictures were concluded at much the same time.[41]TheWoman seriesare decidedlyfigurative paintings.
Another important artist isFranz Kline.[42][43]As with Jackson Pollock and other abstract expressionists, Kline was labelled an "action painter" because of his seemingly spontaneous and intense style, focusing less, or not at all, on figures or imagery, but on the actual brushstrokes and use of canvas; as demonstrated by his paintingNumber 2(1954).[44][45][46]
Automatic writing was an important vehicle for action painters such as Kline (in his black and white paintings), Pollock, Mark Tobey andCy Twombly, who used gesture, surface, and line to create calligraphic, linear symbols and skeins that resemble language, and resonate as powerful manifestations from theCollective unconscious.[47][48]Robert Motherwellin hisElegy to the Spanish Republicseries painted powerful black and white paintings using gesture, surface and symbol evoking powerful emotional charges.[49][50]
Meanwhile, other action painters, notably de Kooning, Gorky,Norman Bluhm,Joan Mitchell, andJames Brooks, used imagery via either abstract landscape or as expressionistic visions of the figure to articulate their highly personal and powerful evocations. James Brooks' paintings were particularly poetic and highly prescient in relationship toLyrical Abstractionthat became prominent in the late 1960s and the 1970s.[51]

## Color field
Clyfford Still,Barnett Newman,Adolph Gottlieband the serenely shimmering blocks of color inMark Rothko's work (which is not what would usually be called expressionist and which Rothko denied was abstract), are classified as abstract expressionists, albeit from whatClement Greenbergtermed theColor fielddirection of abstract expressionism. Both Hans Hofmann andRobert Motherwellcan be comfortably described as practitioners ofAction paintingand Color field painting. In the 1940sRichard Pousette-Dart's tightly constructed imagery often depended upon themes of mythology and mysticism; as did the paintings of Gottlieb, and Pollock in that decade as well.
Color Field painting initially referred to a particular type of abstract expressionism, especially the work of Rothko, Still, Newman, Motherwell, Gottlieb,Ad Reinhardtand several series of paintings byJoan Miró. Greenberg perceived Color Field painting as related to but different from Action painting. The Color Field painters sought to rid their art of superfluous rhetoric. Artists like Motherwell, Still, Rothko, Gottlieb,Hans Hofmann,Helen Frankenthaler,Sam Francis,Mark Tobey, and especially Ad Reinhardt and Barnett Newman, whose masterpieceVir heroicus sublimisis in the collection ofMoMA, used greatly reduced references to nature, and they painted with a highly articulated and psychological use of color. In general, these artists eliminated recognizable imagery, in the case of Rothko and Gottlieb sometimes using symbols and signs as a replacement of imagery.[52]Certain artists quoted references to past or present art, but in general color field painting presents abstraction as an end in itself. In pursuing this direction ofmodern art, artists wanted to present each painting as one unified, cohesive, monolithic image.
In distinction to the emotional energy and gestural surface marks of abstract expressionists such as Pollock and de Kooning, the Color Field painters initially appeared to be cool and austere, effacing the individual mark in favor of large, flat areas of color, which these artists considered to be the essential nature of visual abstraction, along with the actual shape of the canvas, which later in the 1960sFrank Stellain particular achieved in unusual ways with combinations of curved and straight edges. However, Color Field painting has proven to be both sensual and deeply expressive albeit in a different way from gestural abstract expressionism.
Although abstract expressionism spread quickly throughout the United States, the major centers of this style were New York City and California, especially in theNew York School, and theSan Francisco Bay area. Abstract expressionist paintings share certain characteristics, including the use of large canvases, an "all-over" approach, in which the whole canvas is treated with equal importance (as opposed to the center being of more interest than the edges). The canvas as thearenabecame a credo of Action painting, while theintegrity of the picture planebecame a credo of the Color field painters. Younger artists began exhibiting their abstract expressionist related paintings during the 1950s as well includingAlfred Leslie,Sam Francis,Joan Mitchell,Helen Frankenthaler,Cy Twombly,Milton Resnick,Michael Goldberg,Norman Bluhm,Grace Hartigan,Friedel Dzubas, andRobert Goodnoughamong others.
Although Pollock is closely associated with Action Painting because of his style, technique, and his painterlytouchand his physical application of paint, art critics have likened Pollock to both Action painting and color field painting. Another critical view advanced by Greenberg connects Pollock's allover canvasses to the large-scaleWater LiliesofClaude Monetdone during the 1920s. Art critics such asMichael Fried, Greenberg and others have observed that the overall feeling in Pollock's most famous works – hisdrippaintings – read as vast fields of built-up linear elements. They note that these works often read as vast complexes of similarly-valued paint skeins and all-over fields of color and drawing, and are related to the mural-sized Monets which are similarly constructed of close-valued brushed and scumbled marks that also read as fields of color and drawing. Pollock's use of all-over composition lend a philosophical and a physical connection to the way the color field painters like Newman, Rothko and Still construct their unbroken and in Still's case broken surfaces. In several paintings that Pollock painted after his classicdrippainting period of 1947–1950, he used the technique of staining fluid oil paint and house paint into raw canvas. During 1951 he produced a series of semi-figurative black stain paintings, and in 1952 he produced stain paintings using color. In his November 1952 exhibition at theSidney JanisGallery in New York City Pollock showedNumber 12, 1952, a large, masterful stain painting that resembles a brightly colored stained landscape (with an overlay of broadly dripped dark paint); the painting was acquired from the exhibition byNelson Rockefellerfor his personal collection.[53]
WhileArshile Gorkyis considered to be one of the founding fathers of abstract expressionism and asurrealist, he was also one of the first painters of theNew York Schoolwho used the technique ofstaining.Gorky created broad fields of vivid, open, unbroken color that he used in many of his paintings asgrounds.In Gorky's most effective and accomplished paintings between the years 1941–1948, he consistently used intense stained fields of color, often letting the paint run and drip, under and around his familiar lexicon of organic and biomorphic shapes and delicate lines. Another abstract expressionist whose works in the 1940s call to mind the stain paintings of the 1960s and the 1970s isJames Brooks. Brooks regularly used stain as a technique in his paintings from the late 1940s. Brooks began diluting hisoil paintto have fluid colors with which to pour and drip and stain into the mostly raw canvas that he used. These works often combinedcalligraphyand abstract shapes. During the final three decades of his career,Sam Francis' style of large-scale bright abstract expressionism was closely associated with Color field painting. His paintings straddled both camps within the abstract expressionist rubric, Action painting and Color Field painting.
Having seen Pollock's 1951 paintings of thinned black oil paint stained into raw canvas, Frankenthaler began to producestain paintingsin varied oil colors on raw canvas in 1952. Her most famous painting from that period isMountains and Sea. She is one of the originators of the Color Field movement that emerged in the late 1950s.[54]Frankenthaler also studied withHans Hofmann.
Hofmann's paintings are a symphony of color as seen inThe Gate,1959–1960. He was renowned not only as an artist but also as a teacher of art, both in his native Germany and later in the US. Hofmann, who came to the United States from Germany in the early 1930s, brought with him the legacy ofModernism. As a young artist in pre-First World War Paris, Hofmann worked withRobert Delaunay, and he knew firsthand the innovative work of both Picasso and Matisse. Matisse's work had an enormous influence on him, and on his understanding of the expressive language of color and the potentiality of abstraction. Hofmann was one of the first theorists of color field painting, and his theories were influential to artists and to critics, particularly to Clement Greenberg, as well as to others during the 1930s and 1940s. In 1953Morris LouisandKenneth Nolandwere both profoundly influenced byHelen Frankenthaler's stain paintings after visiting her studio in New York City. Returning to Washington, DC., they began to produce the major works that created thecolor field movementin the late 1950s.[55]
In 1972 thenMetropolitan Museum of ArtcuratorHenry Geldzahlersaid:
Clement Greenberg included the work of both Morris Louis and Kenneth Noland in a show that he did at the Kootz Gallery in the early 1950s. Clem was the first to see their potential. He invited them up to New York in 1953, I think it was, to Helen's studio to see a painting that she had just done called Mountains and Sea, a very, very beautiful painting, which was in a sense, out of Pollock and out of Gorky. It also was one of the first stain pictures, one of the first large field pictures in which the stain technique was used, perhaps the first one. Louis and Noland saw the picture unrolled on the floor of her studio and went back to Washington, DC., and worked together for a while, working at the implications of this kind of painting.[56][57]

## In the 1960s after abstract expressionism
Inabstract paintingduring the 1950s and 1960s, several new directions, like theHard-edge paintingexemplified byJohn McLaughlin, emerged. Meanwhile, as a reaction against the subjectivism of abstract expressionism, other forms ofGeometric abstractionbegan to appear in artist studios and in radicalavant-gardecircles. Greenberg became the voice ofPost-painterly abstraction;by curating an influential exhibition of new painting that toured important art museums throughout the United States in 1964.Color field painting,Hard-edge paintingandLyrical Abstraction[58]emerged as radical new directions.

## Abstract expressionism and the Cold War
Since the mid-1970s it has been argued that the style attracted the attention, in the early 1950s, of theCIA, who saw it as representative of the US as a haven of free thought and free markets, as well as a challenge to both thesocialist realiststyles prevalent incommunistnations and the dominance of the European art markets.[59]The book byFrances Stonor Saunders,[citation needed]The Cultural Cold War—The CIA and the World of Arts and Letters,[60](published in the UK asWho Paid the Piper?: CIA and the Cultural Cold War) details how the CIA financed and organized the promotion of American abstract expressionists as part ofcultural imperialismvia theCongress for Cultural Freedomfrom 1950 to 1967. Notably Robert Motherwell's seriesElegy to the Spanish Republicaddressed some of those political issues.Tom Braden, founding chief of the CIA'sInternational Organizations Division(IOD) and ex-executive secretary of theMuseum of Modern Artsaid in an interview, "I think it was the most important division that the agency had, and I think that it played an enormous role in the Cold War."[61]
Against this revisionist tradition, an essay byMichael Kimmelman, chief art critic ofThe New York Times, calledRevisiting the Revisionists: The Modern, Its Critics and the Cold War, asserts that much of that information concerning what was happening on the American art scene during the 1940s and 50s, as well as the revisionists' interpretation of it, is false or decontextualized.[62]Other books on the subject includeArt in the Cold War, by Christine Lindey, which also describes the art of theSoviet Unionat the same time, andPollock and After, edited by Francis Frascina, which reprinted the Kimmelman article.

## Consequences
Canadian painterJean-Paul Riopelle(1923–2002), a member of the Montreal-based surrealist-inspired groupLes Automatistes, helped introduce a related style ofabstract impressionismto the Parisian art world from 1949.Michel Tapié's groundbreaking book,Un Art Autre(1952), was also enormously influential in this regard. Tapié was also a curator and exhibition organizer who promoted the works of Pollock and Hans Hofmann in Europe. By the 1960s, the movement's initial effect had been assimilated, yet its methods and proponents remained highly influential in art, affecting profoundly the work of many artists who followed. Abstract expressionism precededTachisme,Color Field painting,Lyrical Abstraction,Fluxus,Pop Art,Minimalism,Postminimalism,Neo-expressionism, and the other movements of the sixties and seventies and it influenced all those later movements that evolved. Movements which were direct responses to, and rebellions against abstract expressionism began withHard-edge painting(Frank Stella,Robert Indianaand others) andPop Artists, notablyAndy Warhol,Claes OldenburgandRoy Lichtensteinwho achieved prominence in the US, accompanied byRichard Hamiltonin Britain.Robert RauschenbergandJasper Johnsin the US formed a bridge between abstract expressionism and Pop art.Minimalismwas exemplified by artists such asDonald Judd,Robert MangoldandAgnes Martin.
However, many painters, such asJules Olitski,Joan MitchellandAntoni Tàpiescontinued to work in the abstract expressionist style for many years, extending and expanding its visual and philosophical implications, as many abstract artists continue to do today, in styles described asLyrical Abstraction,neo-expressionistand others.
In the years after World War II, a group of New York artists started one of the first true schools of artists in America, bringing about a new era in American artwork: abstract expressionism. This led to the American art boom that brought about styles such asPop Art. This also helped to make New York City into a cultural and artistic hub.[63]
Abstract Expressionists value the organism over the static whole, becoming over being, expression over perfection, vitality over finish, fluctuation over repose, feeling over formulation, the unknown over the known, the veiled over the clear, the individual over society and the inner over the outer.[64]
— William C. Seitz, American artist and Art historian