## Academy Awards
TheAcademy Awards, more commonly known as theOscars, are awards based on artistic and technical merit in film.[1][2]They are presented annually by theAcademy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences(AMPAS) in the United States in recognition of excellence in cinematic achievements, as assessed by the Academy's voting membership.[3]The Oscars are widely considered to be the most prestigious awards in thefilm industry, predominantly centered around films produced inHollywood.[4]
The major award categories, known as theAcademy Awards of Merit,[5]are presented during a live televisedHollywoodceremony in February or March. It is the oldest worldwide entertainment awards ceremony.[1]The1st Academy Awardswere held in 1929.[6]Thesecond ceremony, in 1930, was the first to be broadcast by radio, and the1953 ceremonywas the first to be televised.[1]It is the oldest of thefour major annual American entertainment awards. Its counterparts — theEmmy Awardsfortelevision, theTony AwardsforBroadway theatre, and theGrammy Awardsformusic— are modeled after the Academy Awards.[7]
The Oscar statuette depicts a knight, rendered in theArt Decostyle.[8]

## History
Thefirst Academy Awardspresentation was held on May 16, 1929, at a private dinner function at theHollywood Roosevelt Hotel, with an audience of about 270 people.[9]
The post-awards party was held at theMayfair Hotel.[1]The cost of guest tickets for that night's ceremony was$5(equivalent to $94 in 2025). Fifteen statuettes were awarded, honoring artists, directors, and other participants in the film-making industry of the time, for their works during the 1927–28 period. The ceremony ran for 15minutes.
For this first ceremony, winners were announced to the media three months earlier.[10]For the second ceremony in 1930, and the rest of the first decade, the results were given to newspapers for publication at 11:00pm on the night of the awards.[1]In 1940, theLos Angeles Timesannounced the winners before the ceremony began. As a result, in 1941 the Academy started using a sealed envelope to reveal the names of the winners.[1]
The term "Oscar" is a registered trademark of the AMPAS.

## Milestones
The first Best Actor awarded wasEmil Jannings, for his performances inThe Last CommandandThe Way of All Flesh. As he had to return to Europe before the ceremony, the Academy agreed to give him the prize early, making him the first Academy Award recipient. For thefirst Awards, winners were recognized for multiple films during the qualifying period; Jannings received the award for two films in which he starred, andJanet Gaynorwon the firstBest Actressaward for performances in three films. Beginning with the second ceremony, performers received separate nominations for individual films; no performer has received multiple nominations in the same category since the3rd Academy Awards.
For the first five ceremonies, the eligibility period ran from August 1 to July 31. The6th Academy Awards' eligibility ran from August 1, 1932, to December 31, 1933, and as of the7th Academy Awards, subsequent eligibility periods have matched the calendar year (with the exception of the93rd Academy Awards, which, due to theCOVID-19 pandemic, extended the eligibility period to February 28, 2021).[1]
Best Foreign Language Film, now known asBest International Feature Film, was introduced at the20th Academy Awardsas a special award, and became a competitive category at the29th Academy Awards.[11]
The 74th Academy Awards, held in 2002, presented the firstAcademy Award for Best Animated Feature,[12]won byShrek.
Since 1973, all Academy Awards ceremonies, except for 2021, have ended with theAcademy Award for Best Picture. Traditionally, the winners of the acting categories will present an award at the following year's ceremony. The previous year's winners for Best Actor and Best Supporting Actor present the awards for Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress, respectively, andvice versa. In 2009, this model was replaced by each acting award being introduced by five previous winners, each of whom introduces one of the nominated performances, referred to as the "Fab 5" presenters format.[13]The Fab 5 model returned in 2024 after a 15-year hiatus.
On February 9, 2020,Parasitebecame the first foreign-language film to win Best Picture at the92nd Academy Awards.[14]
The93rd Academy Awardsceremony, honoring thebest films of 2020andearly 2021, was held on April 25, 2021, after it was postponed from its original February 28, 2021, schedule due to theimpact of the COVID-19 pandemic on cinema. As with the two previous ceremonies, there was no host. The ceremony was broadcast onABC. It took place at theDolby Theatrein Los Angeles, California for the 19th consecutive year, with satellite locations atUnion Stationalso in Los Angeles.[15]Because of the virus impact on films and TV industries, Academy president David Rubin and CEO Dawn Hudson announced that for the2021 Oscar Ceremony,streaming filmswith a previously planned theatrical release were eligible.[16]The theatrical requirement was reinstated starting with the95th Academy Awards.[17]

## Overview
The Oscar statuette, officially the Academy Award of Merit,[18]is given to winners of each year's awards. Made of gold-platedbronzeon a black metal base, it is 13.5 in (34.3 cm) tall, weighs 8.5 lb (3.9 kg) and depicts a knight rendered inArt Decostyle holding a sword standing on a reel of film with five spokes. The five spokes represent the original branches of the Academy: Actors, Writers, Directors, Producers, and Technicians.[19]
SculptorGeorge Stanley, who also did the Muse Fountain at theHollywood Bowl, sculptedCedric Gibbons' design. The statuettes presented at the initial ceremonies were gold-plated solid bronze. Within a few years, the bronze was abandoned in favor ofBritannia metal, a pewter-like alloy that is then plated in copper, nickel silver, and finally, 24-karat gold.[18]Due to a metal shortage during World War II, Oscars were made of painted plaster for three years. Following the war, the Academy invited recipients to redeem the plaster figures for gold-plated metal ones.[20]
The only addition to the Oscar since it was created is a minor streamlining of the base. The original Oscar mold was cast in 1928 at theC.W. Shumway & SonsFoundry inBatavia, Illinois, which also contributed to casting the molds for theVince Lombardi TrophyandEmmy Awardstatuettes. From 1972 to 1986, the Oscar statues were cast at the Dodge Trophy Company inCrystal Lake, Illinois.[21]From 1987 to 2015,[22]approximately 50 Oscars in a tin alloy with gold plating were made each year in Chicago by Illinois manufacturerR.S. Owens & Company.[23]It would take between three and four weeks to manufacture 50 statuettes.[24]
In 2016, the Academy returned to bronze as the core metal of the statuettes, handing manufacturing duties toWalden, New York-based Polich Tallix Fine Art Foundry, now owned and operated byUAP Urban Art Projects.[25][26]While based on a digital scan of an original 1929 Oscar, the statuettes retain their modern-era dimensions and black pedestal. Cast in liquid bronze from3D-printedceramic molds and polished, they are then electroplated in 24-karat gold byBrooklyn, New York-based Epner Technology. The time required to produce 50 such statuettes is roughly three months.[27]R.S. Owens is expected to continue producing other awards for the Academy, and service existing Oscars that need replating.[28]

## Naming
The origin of the nickname of the trophy has been disputed, as multiple people have taken credit for naming the trophy "Oscar".
Margaret Herrick, librarian and president of the Academy, may have said she named it after her supposed uncle Oscar in 1931.[a]The only corroboration was a 1938 clipping from theLos Angeles Examiner, in which Herrick told a story of her and her husband joking with each other using the phrase, "How's your uncle Oscar".[29]
Bette Davis, in her 1962 autobiography, claimed she named it in 1936 after her first husband, Harmon Oscar Nelson, of whom the statue's rear end reminded her.[29][30]But the term had been in use at least two years before. In a 1974 biography written by Whitney Stine with commentary from Davis, Davis wrote, "I relinquish once and for all any claim that I was the one—so, Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, the honor is all yours."[29][31]
ColumnistSidney Skolskywrote in his 1970 memoir that he came up with the term in 1934 under pressure for a deadline, mockingVaudevillecomedians who asked "Will you have a cigar, Oscar?" The Academy credits Skolsky with "the first confirmed newspaper reference" toOscarin his column on March 16, 1934, which was written about that year's6th Academy Awards.[32]But in the newspaper clipping that Skolsky referred to, he wrote that "these statues are called 'Oscars'", meaning that the name was already in use.[29]
In 2021, Brazilian researcherWaldemar Dalenogare Netocontradicted Skolsky's claim to have used the term first, finding the probable first public mention of the name "Oscar" in journalistRelman Morin's "Cinematters" column in theLos Angeles Evening Recordon December 5, 1933. Since the awards did not take place that year, he said: "What's happened to the annual Academy banquet? As a rule, the banquet and the awarding of 'Oscar', the bronze statuette given for best performances, is all over long before this."[33]
Bruce Davis, a former executive director of the Academy, credited Eleanore Lilleberg, a secretary at the Academy when the award was first introduced, for the nickname. She had overseen the pre-ceremony handling of the awards. Davis credits Lilleberg because he found in an autobiography of Einar Lilleberg, Eleanore's brother, that Einar had referenced a Norwegian army veteran named Oscar whom the two knew in Chicago, whom Einar described as having always "stood straight and tall".[29][34]He asserts credit "should almost certainly belong to" Lilleberg.[34]

## Engraving
To prevent information identifying the Oscar winners from leaking ahead of the ceremony, Oscar statuettes presented at the ceremony have blank baseplates. Until 2010, winners returned their statuettes to the Academy and had to wait several weeks to have their names inscribed on their respective Oscars. Since 2010, winners have had the option of having engraved nameplates applied to their statuettes at an inscription-processing station at the Governor's Ball, a party held immediately after the Oscar ceremony. The R.S. Owens company has engraved nameplates made before the ceremony, bearing the name of every potential winner. The nameplates for the non-winning nominees are later recycled.[35][36]

## Ownership of Oscar statuettes
Before 1950, Oscar statuettes were, and remain, the property of the recipient.[37]Since then the statuettes have been legallyencumberedby the requirement that the statuette be first offered for sale back to the Academy for$1. If a winner refuses to agree to this stipulation, then the Academy keeps the statuette. Academy Awards predating this agreement have been sold in public auctions and private deals for six-figure sums.[38]
In 1989,Michael Todd'sgrandson tried to sell Todd's Best Picture Oscar for his 1956 production ofAround the World in 80 Daysto a movie prop collector. The Academy earned enforcement of its statuette contract by gaining a permanent injunction against the sale.[citation needed]
In 1992,Harold Russellconsigned his 1946 Oscar for Best Supporting Actor forThe Best Years of Our Livesto auction to raise money for his wife's medical expenses. Though his decision caused controversy, the first Oscar ever to be sold passed to a private collector on August 6, 1992, for$60,500(equivalent to $138,804 in 2025). Russell defended his action, saying, "I don't know why anybody would be critical. My wife's health is much more important than sentimental reasons. The movie will be here, even if Oscar isn't".[39]
In December 2011,Orson Welles' 1941 Oscar forCitizen Kane(Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay) was put up for auction, after his heirs won a 2004 court decision contending that Welles did not sign any agreement to return the statue to the Academy.[40]On December 20, 2011, it sold in an online auction for$861,542(equivalent to $1,233,050 in 2025).[41]
Some buyers have subsequently returned the statuettes to the Academy, which keeps them in its treasury.[38]

## Other awards presented by the Academy
In addition to the Academy Award of Merit (Oscar award), there are nine honorary (non-competitive) awards presented by the Academy from time to time (except for the Academy Honorary Award, the Technical Achievement Award, and the Student Academy Awards, which are presented annually):[42]
The Academy also awardsNicholl Fellowships in Screenwriting.

## Nomination
From 2004 to 2020, the Academy Award nomination results were announced to the public in mid-January. Prior to that, the results were announced in early February. In 2021, the nominees were announced in March. In 2022, the nominees were announced in early February for the first time since 2003.

## Voters
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS), a professional honorary organization, is composed of 9,905 voting members as of 2024[update].[43][44]
Academy membership is divided into different branches, with each representing a different discipline in film production. As of 2024[update], actors constitute the largest bloc, numbering 1,258 (12.7% of the voting body).[44]Votes have been certified by the auditing firmPricewaterhouseCoopers, and its predecessorPrice Waterhouse, since the7th Academy Awardsin 1935.[45][46][47]In May 2011, the Academy sent a letter advising its then-6,000 or so voting members that an online system for Oscar voting would be implemented in 2013, replacing mailed paper ballots.[48]
All AMPAS members must be invited to join by the Board of Governors, on behalf of Academy Branch Executive Committees. Membership eligibility may be achieved by a competitive nomination, or an existing member may submit a name, based on other significant contributions to the field of motion pictures.
New membership proposals are considered annually. The Academy does not publicly disclose its membership, although as recently as 2007 press releases have announced the names of those who have been invited to join.[49]
In 2012, the results of a study conducted by theLos Angeles Timeswere published describing the demographic breakdown of approximately 88% of AMPAS' voting membership. Of the 5,100+ active voters confirmed, 94% wereCaucasian, 77% were male, and 54% were found to be over the age of 60. Thirty-three percent of voting members are former nominees (14%) and winners (19%).[50]In 2016, the Academy launched an initiative to expand its membership and increase diversity. In 2024, voting membership stood at 9,905.[44]
In 2025, a newly announced procedure required Academy members to view all nominated films within a category to be eligible to cast a vote in the final round of that category. The verification process will be done through the Academy's members-only streaming platform and submitting a form for films viewed at in-person events such as at festivals, screenings or private events.[51]

## Rules
According to Rules 2 and 3 of the official Academy Awards Rules, a film must open in the previous calendar year, from midnight at the start of January 1 to midnight at the end of December 31, inLos Angeles County, California, and play for seven consecutive days, to qualify, except for the Best International Feature Film, Best Documentary Feature, and awards in short film categories. The film must be shown at least three times on each day of its qualifying run, with at least one of the daily showings starting between 6pm and 10pm local time.[52][53]
For example, the 2009Best Picturewinner,The Hurt Locker, was originally first released in 2008, but did not qualify for the2008 awards, as it did not play its Oscar-qualifying run in Los Angeles until mid-2009, thus qualifying for the2009 awards. Foreign films must include English subtitles. Each country can submit only one film for consideration in the International Feature Film category per year.[54]
Rule 2 states that a film must befeature-length, defined as a minimum of 40minutes, except for short-subject awards. It must exist either on a35 mmor70 mm filmprint, or in 24frame/s or 48frame/sprogressive scandigital cinemaformat, with a minimum projector resolution of 2,048 by 1,080 pixels.[55]Since the90th Academy Awards, presented in 2018, multi-part and limited series have been ineligible for the Best Documentary Feature award. This followed the win ofO.J.: Made in America, an eight-hour presentation that was screened in a limited release before being broadcast in five parts onABCandESPN, in that category in2017. The Academy's announcement of the new rule made no direct mention of that film.[34]
The Best International Feature Film award does not require a U.S. release. It requires the film to be submitted as its country's official selection.
The Best Documentary Feature award requires either week-long releases inbothLos Angeles Countyandany of thefive boroughsof New York City during the previous calendar year,[b]or a qualifying award at a competitive film festival from the Documentary Feature Qualifying Festival list, regardless of any public exhibition or distribution, or submission in the International Feature Film category as its country's official selection. The qualifying theatrical runs must meet the same requirements as those for non-documentary films regarding numbers and times of screenings. A film must have been reviewed by a critic fromThe New York Times,Time Out New York, theLos Angeles Times, orLA Weekly.[57]
Producers must submit an Official Screen Credits online form before the deadline. If it is not submitted by the defined deadline, the film will be ineligible for Academy Awards in any year. The form includes the production credits for all related categories.
Awards in short film categories (Best Documentary Short Subject, Best Animated Short Film, and Best Live Action Short Film) have different eligibility rules from most other competitive awards. First, the qualifying period for release does not coincide with a calendar year, instead covering one year starting on October 1, and ending on September 30 of the calendar year before the ceremony. Second, there are multiple methods of qualification. The main method is a week-long theatrical release ineitherNew York CityorLos Angeles County during the eligibility period. Films can also qualify by winning specified awards at one of several competitive film festivals designated by the Academy, also without regard to prior public distribution.[57][58]
A film that is selected as a gold, silver, or bronze medal winner in an appropriate category of the immediately previous Student Academy Awards is also eligible (Documentary category for that award, and Animation, Narrative, Alternative, or International for the other awards). The requirements for the qualifying theatrical run are also different from those for other awards. Only one screening per day is required. For the Documentary award, the screening must start between noon and 10pm local time. For other awards, no specific start time is required, but the film must appear in regular theater listings with dates and screening times.[57][58]
In late December, ballots and lists of eligible films are sent to the membership. For most categories, members from each of the branches vote to determine the nominees only in their respective categories, i.e. only directors vote for directors, writers for writers, actors for actors, etc. In the special case of Best Picture, all voting members are eligible to select the nominees. A number of branches are only eligible to vote in Best Picture during nomination voting; this includes a producers' branch, as Best Picture is awarded to a film's producer(s), and other branches which have no corresponding award.[44]In all major categories, a variant of thesingle transferable voteis used, with each member casting a ballot with up to five nominees (ten for Best Picture) ranked preferentially.[59][60][61]In certain categories, including International Feature Film, Documentary and Animated Feature, nominees are selected by special screening committees made up of members from all branches.
In most categories, the winner is selected from among the nominees byplurality votingof all members.[59][61]Since 2009, the Best Picture winner has been chosen byinstant-runoff voting.[61][62]Since 2013, re-weightedrange votinghas been used to select the nominees for theBest Visual Effects.[63]
Film companies will spend as much as several million dollars onmarketing to awards votersfor a film in the running for Best Picture, in attempts to improve chances of receiving Oscars and other film awards conferred inOscar season. The Academy enforces rules to limit overt campaigning by its members to try to eliminate excesses and prevent the process from becoming undignified. It has an awards czar on staff who advises members on allowed practices and levies penalties on offenders.[64]For example, a producer of the 2009 Best Picture nomineeThe Hurt Lockerwas disqualified as a producer in the category when he contacted associates urging them to vote for his film and not another that was seen as the front-runner.The Hurt Lockereventually won.

## Academy Screening Room
The Academy Screening Room or Academy Digital Screening Room is a securestreaming platformwhich allows voting members of the Academy to view all eligible films in one place. It was introduced in 2019, for the 2020 Oscars. DVD screeners and Academy in-person screenings were still provided. For films to be included on the platform, the North American distributor must pay$12,500, including awatermarkingfee, and a digital copy of the film to be prepared for streaming by the Academy. The platform can be accessed viaApple TVandRokuplayers.[65][66]The watermarking process involved several video security firms, creating a forensic watermark and restricting the ability to take screenshots or screen recordings.[67]
In 2021, for the 2022 Oscars, the Academy banned all physical screeners and in-person screenings, restricting official membership viewing to the Academy Screening Room. Films eligible in the Documentary and International categories were made available in different sections of the platform. Distributors can also pay an extra fee to add video featurettes to promote their films on the platform.[68]The in-person screenings were cancelled because of the COVID-19 pandemic.[69]Eligible films do not have to be added to the platform, but the Academy advertises them to voting members when they are.[68]

## Telecast
The major awards are presented at a live televised ceremony, commonly in late February or early March following the relevant calendar year, and six weeks after the announcement of the nominees. It is the culmination of the film awards season, which usually begins during November or December of the previous year. This is an elaborate extravaganza, with the invited guests walking up the red carpet in the creations of the most prominent fashion designers of the day.Black tiedress is the most common outfit for men. Fashion may dictate not wearing abow tie, and musical performers are sometimes not required to adhere to this. The artists who recorded the nominees for Best Original Song quite often perform those songs live at the awards ceremony, and the fact that they are performing is often used to promote the television broadcast.
The Academy Awards is the world's longest-running awards show televised live from the United States to all time zones in North America and worldwide, and gathers millions of viewers elsewhere throughout the world.[70]The Oscars were first televisedin 1953byNBC, which continued to broadcast the event until1960, whenABCtook over, televising the festivities, including the first color broadcast of the event in1966, to1970. NBC regained the rights for five years(1971–75),then ABC resumed broadcast duties in1976and its current contract with the Academy runs through 2028,[71]after which the ceremony will be broadcast exclusively onYouTubestarting with 2029’s ceremony.[72]
The Academy has produced condensed versions of the ceremony for broadcast in international markets, especially those outside of the Americas, in more desirable local timeslots. The ceremony was broadcast live internationally for the first time via satellite since 1970, but only two South American countries, Chile and Brazil, purchased the rights to air the broadcast. By that time, the television rights to the Academy Awards had been sold in 50 countries. In 1980, the rights were sold to 60 countries, and by1984, the television rights to the Academy Awards were licensed in 76 countries.
In2004, the ceremonies were moved up from late March/early April to late February, to help disrupt and shorten the intenselobbying and ad campaignsassociated withOscar seasonin thefilm industry. Another reason was because of the growing television ratings success coinciding with theNCAA division I men's basketball tournament, which would cut into the Academy Awards audience. In1976and1977, ABC's regained Oscars were moved from Tuesday to Monday and went directly opposite the national championship game on NBC. The earlier date is also to the advantage of ABC, as it now usually occurs during the highly profitable and important Februarysweepsperiod.[73]
Some years, the ceremony is moved into the first Sunday of March to avoid a clash with theWinter Olympics. Another reason for the move to late February and early March is to avoid the awards ceremony occurring so close to the religious holidays ofPassoverand Easter, which for decades had been a grievance from members and the general public.[73]Advertising is somewhat restricted, as traditionally no film studios or competitors of official Academy Award sponsors may advertise during the telecast. As of 2020, the production of the Academy Awards telecast held the distinction of winning one the highest number ofEmmysin history, with 54 wins and 280 nominations overall.[74]
After many years of being held on Mondays at 6:00p.m.Pacific/9:00p.m.Eastern, since the1999 ceremony, it was moved to Sundays at 5:30p.m. PT/8:30p.m. ET.[75]The reasons given for the move were that more viewers would tune in on Sundays, that Los Angeles rush-hour traffic jams could be avoided, and an earlier start time would prevent the ceremony from going late into the night in the East.[76]For many years the film industry opposed a Sunday broadcast because it would cut into the weekend box office.[77]
In 2010, the Academy contemplated moving the ceremony even further back into January, citing television viewers' fatigue with the film industry's long awards season. However, such an accelerated schedule would dramatically decrease the voting period for its members, to the point where some voters would only have time to view the contending films streamed on their computers, as opposed to traditionally receiving the films and ballots in the mail. Additionally, a January ceremony on Sunday would clash withNational Football League(NFL) playoff games.[78]In 2018, the Academy announced that the ceremony would be moved from late February to mid-February beginning with the 92nd Academy Awards in 2020.[79]In 2024, the ceremony was moved to an even earlier start time of 4:00p.m. PT/7:00p.m. ET, in an effort to improve East Coast viewership by having it conclude within primetime hours.[80]The change also gave the ability for ABC to air a half-hour of primetime programming as a lead-out program at 7:30p.m. PT/10:30p.m. ET, after having sometimes done so in the late-night block following late local newscasts.[81][82][83]
Originally scheduled for April 8, 1968, the40th Academy Awardsceremony was postponed for two days, because of theassassinationofDr. Martin Luther King, Jr.On March 30, 1981, the53rd Academy Awardswas postponed for one day, after theattempted assassinationof PresidentRonald Reaganand others in Washington, D.C.[84]
In 1993, anIn Memoriamsegment was introduced,[85]honoring those who had made a significant contribution to cinema who had died in the preceding 12 months, a selection compiled by a small committee of Academy members.[86]This segment has drawn criticism over the years for the omission of some names. Criticism was also levied for many years regarding another aspect, with the segment having a "popularity contest" feel as the audience varied their applause to those who had died by the subject's cultural impact. The applause has since been muted during the telecast, and the audience is discouraged from clapping during the segment and giving silent reflection instead. This segment was later followed by a commercial break.
In terms of broadcast length, the ceremony generally averages three and a half hours. The first Oscars, in 1929, lasted 15minutes. At the other end of the spectrum, the 2002 ceremony lasted four hours and twenty-three minutes.[87][88]In 2010, the organizers of the Academy Awards announced winners'acceptance speechesmust not run past 45seconds. This, according to organizer Bill Mechanic, was to ensure the elimination of what he termed "the single most hated thing on the show"—overly long and embarrassing displays of emotion.[89]In 2016, in a further effort to streamline speeches, winners' dedications were displayed on an on-screenticker.[90]
During the 2018 ceremony, hostJimmy Kimmelacknowledged how long the ceremony had become, by announcing that he would give a brand-newjet skito whoever gave the shortest speech of the night, a reward won byMark Bridgeswhen accepting hisBest Costume Designaward forPhantom Thread.[91]The Wall Street Journalanalyzed the average minutes spent across the 2014–2018 telecasts as follows: 14 on song performances; 25 on the hosts' speeches; 38 on prerecorded clips; and 78 on the awards themselves, broken into 24 on the introduction and announcement, 24 on winners walking to the stage, and 30 on their acceptance speeches.[92]
Although still dominant in ratings, the viewership of the Academy Awards has steadily dropped. The88th Academy Awardswere the lowest-rated in the past eight years (although with increases in male and 18–49 viewership), while the show itself also faced mixed reception. Following the show,Varietyreported that ABC was, in negotiating an extension to its contract to broadcast the Oscars, seeking to have more creative control over the broadcast itself. Currently and nominally, AMPAS is responsible for most aspects of the telecast, including the choice of production staff and hosting, although ABC is allowed to have some input on their decisions.[93]In August 2016, AMPAS extended its contract with ABC to 2028: the contract neither contains any notable changes nor gives ABC any further creative control over the telecast.[94]
On December 17, 2025, the Academy announced thatYouTubehad acquired the rights to the Academy Awards beginning with the 101st ceremony in 2029, replacing ABC under a contract that will last through 2033. YouTube will serve as the exclusive worldwide broadcaster of the ceremony, while the Oscars' YouTube channel will also feature other AMPAS-produced ancillary content and events (including ceremonies, interviews, and other digital content). The Academy will also partner with theGoogle Arts & Cultureprogram to help digitize portions of theAcademy Museum of Motion Picturesand the organization's collection.[95][96]

## TV ratings
Historically, the telecast's viewership is higher when box-office hits are favored to win the Best Picture award. More than 57.25million viewers tuned to the telecast for the70th Academy Awardsin 1998, the year ofTitanic, which generated a box office haul during its initial 1997–98 run of$600.8 millionin the US, a box-office record that would remain unsurpassed for years.[98]The76th Academy Awardsceremony, in whichThe Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King(pre-telecast box office earnings of$368 million) received 11 Awards, including Best Picture, drew 43.56million viewers.[99]The most-watched ceremony based onNielsen ratingsto date, was the42nd Academy Awards(Best PictureMidnight Cowboy), which drew a 43.4% household rating on April 7, 1970.[100]Hoping to reinvigorate the pre-show and ratings, the 2023 Oscars organizers hired members of theMet Galacreative team.[101]
By contrast, ceremonies honoring films that have not performed well at the box office tend to show weaker ratings, despite how much critical acclaim those films have received. The78th Academy Awards, which awarded a low-budget independent film (Crashwith a pre-Oscar gross of$53.4 million) generated an audience of 38.64million with a household rating of 22.91%.[102]In 2008, the80th Academy Awardstelecast was watched by 31.76million viewers on average with an 18.66% household rating, the lowest-rated and least-watched ceremony at the time, in spite of celebrating 80 years of the Academy Awards.[103]The Best Picture winner of that particular ceremony was another independent film (this time, theCoen brothers'sNo Country for Old Men).
Whereas the92nd Academy Awardsdrew an average of 23.6million viewers,[104]the93rd Academy Awardsdrew an even lower viewership of 10.4million,[105]the lowest viewership recorded by Nielsen since it started recording audience totals in 1974.[106]The94thand95theditions drew 16.6 and 18.7million viewers, respectively, still below the audience of the 92nd edition.[107][108]

## Archive
TheAcademy Film Archiveholds copies of every Academy Awards ceremony since the 1949 Oscars, as well as material on many prior ceremonies, along with ancillary material related to more recent shows. Copies are held in a variety of film, video and digital formats.[109]

## Venues
In 1929, the first Academy Awards were presented at a banquet dinner at theHollywood Roosevelt Hotel. From 1930 to 1943, the ceremony alternated between two venues: theAmbassador HotelonWilshire Boulevardand theBiltmore Hotelin downtown Los Angeles.
Grauman's Chinese Theatrein Hollywood then hosted the awards from 1944 to 1946, followed by theShrine Auditoriumin Los Angeles from 1947 to 1948. The21st Academy Awardsin 1949 were held at the Academy Award Theatre at what had been the Academy's headquarters onMelrose Avenuein Hollywood.[110]
From 1950 to 1960, the awards were presented at Hollywood'sPantages Theatre. With the advent of television, the awards from 1953 to 1957 took place simultaneously in Hollywood and New York, first at theNBC International Theatre(1953) and the Center Theater (1954), then at theNBC Century Theatre, after which the ceremony took place solely in Los Angeles. In 1961, the Oscars moved to theSanta Monica Civic AuditoriuminSanta Monica, California. In 1969, the Academy moved the ceremonies back to Downtown Los Angeles, to theDorothy Chandler Pavilionat theLos Angeles County Music Center. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the ceremony returned to the Shrine Auditorium.
In 2002, Hollywood'sDolby Theatre, previously known as the Kodak Theatre, became the presentation's current venue.[111]In March 2026, it was announced that the ceremony would relocate to thePeacock Theaterbeginning in 2029, under a ten-year deal with the venue.[112]

## Current categories
In the first year of the awards, the Best Directing award was split into two categories, Drama and Comedy. At times, the Best Original Score award has also been split into separate categories, Drama and Comedy/Musical. From the 1930s to the 1960s, the Art Direction (now Production Design), Cinematography, and Costume Design awards were split into two categories (black-and-white films and color films). Prior to 2012, the Production Design award was called Art Direction, while the Makeup and Hairstyling award was called Makeup. Prior to 2020, the International Feature Film award was called Foreign Language Film.
In August 2018, the Academy announced that several categories would not be televised live, but recorded during commercial breaks and aired later in the ceremony.[113]Following dissent from Academy members, they announced that they would air all 24 categories live. This followed several proposals, among them, the introduction of a Popular Film category, that the Academy had announced but did not implement.[114]

## Upcoming categories
In February 2024, the Academy announced it would introduce an award for Achievement in Casting from the 98th ceremony in 2026,[116]having rejected the category in 1999.[117]In April 2025, it announced that Best Stunt Design would be introduced from the 100th ceremony in 2028,[115]having rejected the proposal for a Best Stunt Coordination award every year from 1991 to 2012.[118][119][120][121][122]

## Proposed categories
The Board of Governors meets each year and considers new award categories, including:

## Special categories
The Special Academy Awards are voted on by special committees, rather than by the Academy membership as a whole. They are not always presented on an annual basis.

## Accusations of commercialism
Due to the positive exposure and prestige of the Academy Awards, many studios spend around 25 million dollars and hire publicists specifically to promote their films during what is typically called the "Oscar season".[124][125]This has generated accusations of the Academy Awards being influenced more by marketing andlobbyingthan by quality.William Friedkin, an Academy Award-winning film director and former producer of the ceremony, expressed this sentiment at a conference in New York in 2009, describing it as "the greatest promotion scheme that any industry ever devised for itself".[126]
Tim Dirks, editor ofAMC'sFilmsite, has written of the Academy Awards:
Unfortunately, the critical worth, artistic vision, cultural influence and innovative qualities of many films are not given the same voting weight. Especially since the 1980s, moneymaking "formula-made" blockbusters with glossy production values have often been crowd-pleasing titans (and Best Picture winners), but they haven't necessarily been great films with depth or critical acclaim by any measure.[127]
A recent technique that has been claimed to be used during the Oscar season is thewhisper campaign. These campaigns are intended to spread negative perceptions of other films nominated and are believed to be perpetrated by those who were involved in creating the film. Examples of whisper campaigns include the allegations againstZero Dark Thirtysuggesting that it justifies torture and the claim thatLincolndistorts history.[128]This technique was widely used by former producerHarvey Weinsteinand his companyMiramax, with the campaign strategy gaining further attention after Miramax'sShakespeare in Lovedefeated rival filmSaving Private RyanforBest Picture.[129][125]

## Accusations of bias
Typical criticism of the Academy Awards for Best Picture is that among the winners and nominees there is an over-representation of romantic historical epics, biographical dramas, romantic dramedies and family melodramas, most of which are released in the U.S. in the last three months of the calendar year. The Oscars have been infamously known for selecting specific genres of films to be awarded. The term "Oscar bait" was coined to describe such films. This has led, at times, to more specific criticisms that the Academy is disconnected from the audience, e.g., by favoring "Oscar bait" over audience favorites or favoring historical melodramas over critically acclaimed films that depict current life issues.[130]
Despite the success ofThe Dark KnightandWALL-E, these films did not receive aBest Picturenomination at the81st Academy Awards. These decisions received substantial criticism and were described as "snubs" by many publications.[131][132][133][134][135][136]The backlash to the decision was such that, for the82nd Academy Awardsin 2010, the Academy increased the limit for Best Picture nominees from five to ten.

## Lack of diversity
The Academy Awards have long received criticism over their lack of diversity among the nominees.[137][138][139]This criticism is based on the statistics from every Academy Awards since 1929, which show that only 6.4% of Academy Award nominees have been non-white and since 1991, 11.2% of nominees have been non-white, with the rate of winners being even more polarizing.[140]For a variety of reasons, including marketability and historical bans on interracial couples, a number of high-profile Oscars have been given toyellowfaceportrayals, as well as performances of Asian characters rewritten for white characters.[141][142]It took until 2023 for an Asian woman to win anAcademy Award for Best Actress, whenMichelle Yeohreceived the award for her performance inEverything Everywhere All at Once. The88th awards ceremonybecame the target of a boycott, popularized on social media with thehashtag#OscarsSoWhite, based on activists' perception that its all-white acting nominee list reflected bias.[143]In response, the Academy initiated "historic" changes in membership by 2020.[144][145]Some media critics claim the Academy's efforts to address its purported racial, gender and national biases are merely distractions.[146][147][148][149]By contrast, theGolden Globe Awardsalready have multiple winners of Asian descent in leading actress categories.[150]Some question whether the Academy's definition of "merit" is just or empowering for non-Americans.[151]
The Academy's Representation and Inclusion Standards have been criticized for excludingJewsas a distinct underrepresented class.[152]

## Miscategorization of actors
The Academy has no rules for how to categorize whether a performance is leading or supporting, and it is up to the discretion of the studios whether a given performance is submitted for either Best Actor/Actress or Best Supporting Actor/Actress. This has led to situations where a film has two or more co-leads, and one of these is submitted in a supporting category to avoid the two leads competing against each other, and to increase the film's chances of winning. This practice has been derisively called "category fraud".[153][154]
For example,Rooney Marawas nominated for Best Supporting Actress forCarol(2015), despite her having a comparable amount of screentime toCate Blanchett, who was nominated for Best Actress. Another example isOnce Upon a Time in Hollywood(2019), whereBrad Pittwas nominated for and won Best Supporting Actor, even though he played an equally important role to Best Actor nomineeLeonardo DiCaprio. In both these cases, critics argued that the studios behind the films had placed someone who was actually a leading actor or actress into the supporting categories to avoid them competing against their co-lead.[153][154]

## Symbolism or sentimentalization
Acting prizes in certain years have been criticized for not recognizing superior performances so much as being awarded for personal popularity,[155]to make up for a "snub" for a work that proved in time to be more popular or renowned than the one awarded (a 'make-up Oscar'),[156]or as a "career honor" to recognize a distinguished nominee's entire body of work (a "legacy Oscar").[157][158]

## Recognition of streaming media film
Following the91st Academy Awardsin February 2019 in which theNetflix-broadcast filmRomahad been nominated for ten awards including the Best Picture category, Steven Spielberg and other members of the Academy discussed changing the requirements through the Board of Governors for films as to exclude those from Netflix and other media streaming services. Spielberg had been concerned that Netflix as a film production and distribution studio could spend much more than for typical Oscar-winning films and have much wider and earlier distribution than for other Best Picture-nominated films, while still being able to meet the minimal theatrical-run status to qualify for an Oscar.[159]
TheUnited States Department of Justice, having heard of this potential rule change, wrote a letter to the Academy in March 2019, cautioning them that placing additional restrictions on films that originate from streaming media services without proper justification could raise anti-trust concerns against the Academy.[160]Following its April 2019 board meeting, the Academy Board of Governors agreed to retain the current rules that allow for streaming media films to be eligible for Oscars as long as they have had limited theatrical runs.[161]

## 2022 Chris Rock and Will Smith slapping incident
During the94th Academy Awardson March 27, 2022,Chris Rockjoked aboutJada Pinkett Smith's shaved head[162]with aG.I. Janereference.Will Smithwalked onstage and slapped Rock across the face, then returned to his seat and told Rock, twice, to "Keep my wife's name out [of] your fucking mouth!"[163][164][165]While later accepting theBest Actoraward forKing Richard, Smith apologized to the Academy and the other nominees, but not to Rock.[166][167][168]Rock decided not to press charges against Smith.[169]
On April 8, 2022, the Academy made an announcement via a letter sent by presidentDavid Rubinand CEODawn Hudsoninforming the public that Will Smith had received a ten-year ban from attending the Oscars as a result of the incident.[170]

## Refusals of the award
Some winners critical of the Academy Awards have boycotted the ceremonies and refused to accept their Oscars. The first to do so was screenwriterDudley Nichols(Best Writing in 1935 forThe Informer). Nichols boycotted the8th Academy Awardsceremony because of conflicts between the Academy and the Writers' Guild.[171]Nichols eventually accepted the 1935 award three years later, at the 1938 ceremony. Nichols was nominated for three further Academy Awards during his career.
George C. Scottbecame the second person to refuse his award (Best Actor in 1970 forPatton) at the43rd Academy Awardsceremony. Scott described it as a "meat parade", saying, "I don't want any part of it".[172][173][174]
The third person to refuse the award wasMarlon Brando, who refused his award (Best Actor for 1972'sThe Godfather), citing the film industry's discrimination against and mistreatment ofNative Americans. At the45th Academy Awardsceremony, Brando asked actress andcivil rights activistSacheen Littlefeatherto read a 15-page speech in his place, detailing his criticisms, for which there wasbooingandcheeringby the audience.[171][175]In 2022, Littlefeather was accused by her sisters of misrepresenting her ancestry as Native American.[176][177][178][179][180]

## Disqualifications
Seven films have had nominations revoked before the official award ceremony:[181]
One film was disqualified after winning the award, and had the winner return the Oscar:
One film had its nomination revoked after the award ceremony when it had not won the Oscar:

## Remarks about animated films as children's genre
At the94th Academy Awardsin 2022, the award for the Best Animated Feature was presented by three actresses who portrayed Disney princess characters inlive-action remakesof their respective animated films:Lily James(Cinderella),Naomi Scott(Aladdin), andHalle Bailey(The Little Mermaid). While introducing the category, Bailey stated that animated films are "formative experiences as kids who watch them," as James put it, "So many kids watch these movies over and over." Bailey finished her sentence "over and over and over and over and over." Scott added: "I see some parents who know exactly what we're talking about."[182]The remarks were heavily criticized byanimationenthusiasts and those working in the industry as infantilizing the medium and perpetuating the stigma that animated works arestrictly for children, especially since the industry was credited with sustaining the flow ofHollywoodcontent and revenue during the height of theCOVID-19 pandemic.Phil Lord, co-producer of one of the nominated films,The Mitchells vs. the Machines, tweeted that it was "super cool to position animation as something that kids watch and adults have to endure." The film's official social media accounts responded to the joke with an image reading: "Animation is cinema."[183][184]A week later, Lord and his producing partnerChristopher Millerwrote a guest column inVarietycriticizing the Academy for the joke and how Hollywood has treated animation, writing that "no one set out to diminish animated films, but it's high time we set out to elevate them." They also suggested to the Academy that the category should be presented by a filmmaker who respects the art of animation as cinema.[185]
Adding to the controversy was that the award forBest Animated Short Film(the nominees for which were mostly made up of shorts not aimed at children) was one of theeight categoriesthat were not presented during the live broadcast.[186]The winner for the Best Animated Short award wasThe Windshield Wiper, a multilingual Spanish-American film which isadult animated, while another nominee in three categories: Best Animated Feature,Best Documentary Feature Film, andBest International Feature Film, wasFlee, a PG-13 rated animated documentary about an Afghan refugee.Alberto Mielgo, director ofThe Windshield Wiper, later gave an acceptance speech for the Oscar: "Animation is an art that includes every single art that you can imagine. Animation for adults is a fact. It's happening. Let's call it cinema. I'm very honored because this is just the beginning of what we can do with animation."[186]Some speculations suggested that the speech played a role in the decision not to broadcast the award.[187]
Another factor is that numerous animated films have been made for mature audiences or with ranges of PG-13 or more, with a few of them—The Triplets of Belleville,Persepolis,Chico and Rita,The Wind Rises,Anomalisa,My Life as a Courgette,The Breadwinner,Loving Vincent,Isle of Dogs,I Lost My Body,Flee, andMemoir of a Snail—having been nominated in this category, withThe Boy and the Heronbeing the first adult animated film (in this case, PG-13-rated) to win in the96th Academy Awards.[187][188]
These comments came as#NewDeal4Animation, a movement of animation workers demanding equal pay, treatment and recognition alongside their contemporaries working in live-action, was picking up momentum during negotiations for a new contract betweenThe Animation Guild, IATSE Local 839/SAG-AFTRAand theAlliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers,[189]and the presentation is being used to rally the movement.
During the 96th Academy Awards in 2024, hostJimmy Kimmelsaid: "Please raise your hand if you let your kid fill out this part of the ballot." These remarks would again prompt backlash, withChristopher Miller, producer of that year's nominatedSpider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse, tweeting out that the joke was "tired and lazy".[190]The PG-13-ratedThe Boy and the Heronwould subsequently win the award.

## Associated events
The following events are closely associated with the annual Academy Awards:

## Presenter and performer gifts
It has become a tradition to give out gift bags to the presenters and performers at the Oscars. In recent years, these gifts have been extended to award nominees and winners.[196]The value of each of these gift bags can reach into the tens of thousands of dollars. In 2014, the value was reported to be as high as$80,000.[197]The value has risen to the point where the U.S.Internal Revenue Serviceissued a statement regarding the gifts and their taxable status.[198]
Oscar gift bags have included vacation packages to Hawaii and Mexico and Japan, a private dinner party for the recipient and friends at a restaurant,videophones, a four-night stay at a hotel, watches, bracelets, spa treatments, bottles of vodka, maple salad dressing, weight-loss gummie candy and up to$25,000worth of cosmetic treatments and rejuvenation procedures such as lip fillers and chemical peels from New York City facial plastic surgeon Konstantin Vasyukevich.[196][199][200][201][202]Some of the gifts have even had a "risque" element to them; in 2014, the adult products retailerAdam & Evehad a "Secret Room Gifting Suite". Celebrities visiting the gifting suite includedJudith Hoag,Carolyn Hennesy,Kate Linder,Chris Mulkey,Jim O'HeirandJohn Salley.[203]

## Television ratings and advertisement prices
From 2006 onwards, results are Live+SD; all previous years are live viewing.[97]