## Actor Awards
The Actor Awards presented by SAG-AFTRA, formerly theScreen Actors Guild(SAG)Awards[a], are accolades given by theScreen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists(SAG-AFTRA). The award was founded in 1995, to recognize outstanding performances in film and primetime television. The awards have been one of the major awards events in theHollywood film industrysince, along with theGolden Globe Awardsand theAcademy Awards. The awards focus both on individual performances and the work of the entire ensemble of a drama series and comedy series, and the cast of a motion picture.
Nominations for the awards come from two committees, one for film and one for television, each numbering 2,100 members of the union, randomly selected anew each year, with the full membership (165,000 as of 2012) available to vote for the winners. It is considered an indicator of success at the Academy Awards in acting categories. The awards were telecast onNBCfrom 1995 to 1997 and onTNTfrom 1998 to 2022, with asimulcastonTBSfrom 2007 to 2022. In 2023,Netflixlivestreamed the awards on itsYouTubechannel. Netflix began to air the awards live in 2024.[1]
The inaugural Screen Actors Guild Awards aired live on February 25, 1995, fromUniversal Studios' Stage 12. The second annual awards aired live from theSanta Monica Civic Auditorium, while subsequent awards have been held at theShrine Auditorium.[2]Inthe 2018 ceremony, actressKristen Bellbecame the first host in the award show's history.[3]In November 2025, the SAG Awards was renamed the Actor Awards.[4]As of 2026,Shakespeare in LoveandOne Battle After Anotherare the only films to have received nominations in all eligible categories,[5][6]andEverything Everywhere All at Onceis the only film to receive four awards, including the ensemble award.[7]
The statuette given, a nude male figure holding both amask of comedy and a mask of tragedy, is called "The Actor".[8]It is 16 inches (41 cm) tall, weighs over 12 pounds (5.4 kg), is cast in solid bronze, and is produced by the American Fine Arts Foundry inBurbank, California.[9]

## Per actor
The non-competitiveScreen Actors Guild Life Achievement Awardis excluded in the superlatives.