## Air traffic control
Air traffic control(ATC) is a service provided by ground-basedair traffic controllerswho direct aircraft on the ground and through controlledairspace. The primary purpose of ATC is to prevent collisions, organise and expedite the flow of air traffic, and provide information and other support for pilots.[1]In some countries, ATC can also provide advisory services to aircraft in non-controlled airspace. 
Controllers monitor the location of aircraft in their assigned airspace usingradarand communicate withpilotsbyradio.[2]To prevent collisions, ATC enforcestraffic separationrules, which ensure each aircraft maintains a minimum amount of empty space around it. ATC services are provided to all types of aircraft, includingprivate,military, and commercial flights.[3]Depending on the type of flight and the class of airspace, ATC may issue mandatoryinstructionsor non-bindingadvisories(known asflight informationin some countries). While pilots are required to obey all ATC instructions, thepilot in commandof an aircraft always retains final authority for its safe operation. In an emergency, the pilot may deviate from ATC instructions to the extent required to maintain the safety of the aircraft.[4]Weather conditions, such as thunderstorms, strong winds, and low visibility, can significantly affect air traffic control operations, leading to delays, diversions, and the need for alternate routing.[5]

## Language
Pursuant to requirements of theInternational Civil Aviation Organization(ICAO), ATC operations are conducted either in the English language, or the local language used by the station on the ground.[6]In practice, the native language for a region is used; however, English must be used upon request.[6]

## History
In 1920,Croydon Airportnear London, England, was the firstairportin the world to introduce air traffic control.[7]The 'aerodrome control tower' was a wooden hut 15 feet (5 metres) high with windows on all four sides.  It was commissioned on 25 February 1920, and provided basic traffic, weather, and location information to pilots.[8][9]
In the United States, air traffic control developed three divisions. The first of several air mail radio stations (AMRS) was created in 1922, after World War I, when the U.S. Post Office began using techniques developed by theU.S. Armyto direct and track the movements ofreconnaissance aircraft. Over time, the AMRS morphed intoflight service stations. Today's flight service stations do not issue control instructions, but provide pilots with many other flight related informational services. They do relay control instructions from ATC in areas where flight service is the only facility with radio or phone coverage. The first airport traffic control tower, regulating arrivals, departures, and surface movement of aircraft in the US at a specific airport, opened in Cleveland in 1930. Approach- and departure-control facilities were created after adoption of radar in the 1950s to monitor and control the busy airspace around larger airports. The first air route traffic control center (ARTCC), which directs the movement of aircraft between departure and destination, was opened in Newark in 1935, followed in 1936 by Chicago and Cleveland.[10]
After the1956 Grand Canyon mid-air collision, killing all 128 on board, the FAA was given the air-traffic responsibility in the United States in 1958, and this was followed by other countries. In 1960, Britain, France, Germany, and theBeneluxcountries set upEurocontrol, intending to merge their airspaces. The first and only attempt to pool controllers between countries is theMaastricht Upper Area Control Centre(MUAC), founded in 1972 by Eurocontrol, and covering Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and north-western Germany. In 2001, theEuropean Union(EU) aimed to create a 'Single European Sky', hoping to boost efficiency and gain economies of scale.[11]
In the USSR, the first air traffic control service was organized in 1929 on theMoscow-Irkutskair route; in 1930, control areas were defined along all existing air routes.[12]

## Airport traffic control tower
The primary method of controlling the immediate airport environment is visual observation from the airport control tower. The tower is typically a tall, windowed structure, located within the airport grounds. Theair traffic controllers, usually abbreviated 'controller', are responsible for separation and efficient movement of aircraft and vehicles operating on the taxiways and runways of the airport itself, and aircraft in the air near the airport, generally 5 to 10nautical miles(9 to 19kilometres; 6 to 12miles), depending on the airport procedures. A controller must carry out the job using the precise and effective application of rules and procedures; however, they need flexible adjustments according to differing circumstances, often under time pressure.[13]In a study which compared stress in the general population and among staff working in this kind of system, there was markedly showed more stress level for controllers. This variation can be explained, at least in part, by the characteristics of the job.[14]
Remote and virtual tower(RVT) is a system based on air traffic controllers being located somewhere other than at the local airport tower, and still able to provide air traffic control services.[15][16][17]

## Ground control
Ground control (sometimes known asground movement control, GMC) is responsible for the airportmovementareas.[18]
Some busier airports have surface movement radar (SMR).[18]

## Air control or local control
Air control (known to pilots astowerortower control) is responsible for the active runway surfaces.[18]

## Flight data and clearance delivery
Clearance delivery is the position that issues route clearances to aircraft, typically before they commence taxiing. These clearances contain details of the route that the aircraft is expected to fly after departure.[18]

## Analogous use
In the field ofsupply chain management, the concept of a "supply chain control tower" reflects the "end-to-end visibility" provided by an air traffic control tower.[19]Ashutoch Gupta, writing forGartner, observes that a supply chain control tower can be established "by combining people, process, data, organization and technology to improve visibility, control and decision making".[20]

## Airports without a control tower (mandatory frequency airport)
An airport with a mandatory frequency (MF), mandatory traffic advisory frequency (MTAF) or air/ground radio (A/G) is an airport whichdoes not have a control towerbut still requires arriving and departing aircraft to communicate with other aircraft or a radio operator on a published frequency.
Mandatory frequency airports are rare in theUnited States, one example beingKetchikan International Airport(14 CFR93.151), but they are common in other countries such asCanada,Australia, theUnited KingdomandNorway; often, an MF or MTAF airport is one withscheduled passenger servicebut insufficient traffic to support acontrol tower. If there is a flight service specialist monitoring the frequency, the specialist will give pilots advisories about traffic, weather, and surface conditions, and may relayIFRclearances from en routecontrollers, but cannot give clearances themselves.
In theUnited Kingdom, this type of airport is said to have an Air/Ground Radio service, using the callsign suffix "Radio".  This is provided at airports that have a moderate level of VFR-only GA traffic.
Some examples of MF airports in Canada includeKingston/Norman Rogers AirportandKuujjuaq Airport.

## Approach and terminal control
In the U.S., TRACONs are additionally designated by a three-digit alphanumeric code.  For example, the Chicago TRACON is designated C90.[21]

## Area control centre / en-route centre
Anarea control center, as opposed to a terminal control center, is a specific type of air traffic control center that primarily controlsIFRtraffic, or aircraft at high altitude flying by instruments, instead of aircraft that are landing or taking off.[22]Each area control center is assigned aflight information region,  and certain area control centers near the coast are also tasked with monitoring aircraft flying over the ocean.[22]Area control centers perform similar duties to other types of air traffic control, such as rerouting aircraft to deal with adverse conditions and directing the course of aircraft to ensure separation.

## Radar coverage
The position of aircraft is mainly determined by the following types of radars:
In order to extend their surveillance capabilities, some air navigation service providers (e.g., Airservices Australia, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration,Nav Canada, etc.) have implementedautomatic dependent surveillance – broadcast(ADS-B).  This newer technology reverses the radar concept.  Instead of radar 'finding' a target by interrogating the transponder, the ADS-B equipped aircraft 'broadcasts' a position report as determined by thenavigationequipment on board the aircraft.  ADS-C is another mode of automatic dependent surveillance, however ADS-C operates in the 'contract' mode, where the aircraft reports a position, automatically or initiated by the pilot, based on a predetermined time interval.  It is also possible for controllers to request more frequent reports to more quickly establish aircraft position for specific reasons.[23]However, since the cost for each report is charged by the ADS service providers to the company operating the aircraft,[disputed–discuss]more frequent reports are not commonly requested, except in emergency situations.  ADS-C is significant, because it can be used where it is not possible to locate the infrastructure for a radar system (e.g., over water).Operational display systemsare now deployed and accept ADS-C inputs as part of their display.[24][verification needed]
A radar archive system (RAS) keeps an electronic record of all radar information, preserving it for a few weeks.  This information can be useful forsearch and rescue.  When an aircraft has 'disappeared' from radar screens, a controller can review the last radar returns from the aircraft to determine its likely position.  For an example, see the crash report in the following citation.[25]

## Traffic
Air traffic control errors occur when the separation (either vertical or horizontal) between airborne aircraft falls below the minimum prescribed separation set (for the domestic United States) by the US Federal Aviation Administration.  Separation minimums for terminal control areas (TCAs) around airports are lower than en-route standards.  Errors generally occur during periods following times of intense activity, when controllers tend to relax and overlook the presence of traffic and conditions that lead to loss of minimum separation.[26][text–source integrity?]

## Weather
According to theCivil Air Navigation Services Organisation(CANSO), weather significantly impacts global aviation, with more than 70% of air traffic delays being attributed to adverse weather conditions. These disruptions cause widespread delays, rerouting by ATC, and cancellations across continents. In 2024, Europe experienced a 40% increase in weather-related en-route delays compared to 2023. As increasingly adverse weather intensifies the frequency and severity of these events, CANSO urged collaboration and real-time solutions among global aviation stakeholders to mitigate the effects of weather on flight operations.[27]

## Infrastructure
Global ATC infrastructure is a complex network that varies significantly by region, with many countries facing challenges related to outdated technology, staffing shortages, and increasing traffic demand. While some regions, like parts of Europe and the U.S., have implemented modernization programs such as SESAR and NextGen,[28]many others, especially in developing nations, still rely on legacy radar systems and voice-based communication, which limit efficiency and safety. These disparities contribute to delays and reduce the overall resilience of global air traffic management. According to the ICAO, coordinating ATC systems and accelerating digitalization is essential for meeting future aviation demands.[29]Similarly, a 2024 report from the International Air Transport Association (IATA) emphasizes the urgency of investing in scalable, data-driven infrastructure to handle post-pandemic growth and ensure sustainability across the network.[30]

## Congestion
Constrained control capacity and growing traffic lead toflight cancellation and delays.[31][32]In America, delays caused by ATC grew by 69% between 2012 and 2017.[11]ATC staffing issues were a major factor in congestion.[33]Estimates suggest that  more efficient ATC could save 5-10% of aviation fuel by avoidingholding patternsand indirectairways.[11]
Accordingly, the explanation of delays as resulting from ATC restrictions has become a common justification used by airlines to deny compensation claims.[34]However, several European courts have determined that this rationale is sometimes applied incorrectly, with airlines attributing delays to ATC although all measures haven't been taken by the air carrier concerned to avoid the delays or cancellations.[35][36]

## Call signs
A prerequisite to safe air traffic separation is the assignment and use of distinctivecall signs.  These are permanently allocated byICAOon request, usually toscheduled flights, and some air forces and other military services formilitary flights.  There are written call signs with a two or three letter combination followed by the flight number such as AAL872 or VLG1011.  As such, they appear on flight plans and ATC radar labels.  There are also theaudioorradio-telephonycall signs used on the radio contact between pilots and air traffic control.  These are not always identical to their written counterparts.  An example of an audio call sign would be 'Speedbird 832', instead of the written 'BAW832'.  This is used to reduce the chance of confusion between ATC and the aircraft.  By default, the call sign for any other flight is theregistration number(or tail number in US parlance) of the aircraft, such as 'N12345', 'C-GABC', or 'EC-IZD'.  The shortradio-telephonycall signs for these tail numbers is the last three letters using theNATO phonetic alphabet(e.g. ABC, spokenalpha-bravo-charliefor C-GABC), or the last three numbers (e.g.three-four-fivefor N12345).  In the United States, the prefix may be an aircraft type, model, or manufacturer in place of the first registration character, for example, 'N11842' could become 'Cessna 842'.[37]

## Technology
TheFederal Aviation Administration(FAA) has spent over US$3 billion on software, but a fully automated system is still yet to be achieved.  In 2002, the United Kingdom commissioned a newarea control centerinto service at theLondon Area Control Centre(LACC) atSwanwickin Hampshire, relieving a busy suburban centre atWest Draytonin Middlesex, north ofLondon Heathrow Airport.  Software fromLockheed-Martinpredominates at the London Area Control Centre.  However, the centre was initially troubled by software and communications problems causing delays and occasional shutdowns.[38]
Some tools are available in different domains to help the controller further:

## Proposed changes
In the United States, some alterations to traffic control procedures are being examined:
In Europe, theSingle European Sky ATM Research(SESAR)[42]programme plans to develop new methods, technologies, procedures, and systems to accommodate future (2020 and beyond) air traffic needs.  In October 2018, European controller unions dismissed setting targets to improve ATC as "a waste of time and effort", as new technology could cut costs for users but threaten their jobs.  In April 2019, the EU called for a 'Digital European Sky', focusing on cutting costs by including a common digitisation standard, and allowing controllers to move to where they are needed instead of merging national ATCs, as it would not solve all problems.  Single air-traffic control services in continent-sized America and China does not alleviate congestion.  Eurocontrol tries to reduce delays by diverting flights to less busy routes: flight paths across Europe were redesigned to accommodate the new airport in Istanbul, which opened in April, but the extra capacity will be absorbed by rising demand for air travel.[11]
Well-paid jobs in western Europe could move east with cheaper labour.  The average Spanish controller earn over €200,000 a year, over seven times the country average salary, more than pilots, and at least ten controllers were paid over €810,000 ($1.1m) a year in 2010.  French controllers spent a cumulative nine months on strike between 2004 and 2016.[11]

## Privatisation
Many countries have also privatised or corporatised their air navigation service providers.[47]There are several models that can be used for ATC service providers.  The first is to have the ATC services be part of a government agency as is currently the case in the United States.  The problem with this model is that funding can be inconsistent, and can disrupt the development and operation of services.  Sometimes funding can disappear when lawmakers cannot approve budgets in time.  Both proponents and opponents of privatisation recognise that stable funding is one of the major factors for successful upgrades of ATC infrastructure.  Some of the funding issues include sequestration and politicisation of projects.[48]Proponents argue that moving ATC services to a private corporation could stabilise funding over the long term which will result in more predictable planning and rollout of new technology as well as training of personnel.[citation needed]As of November 2024, The United States had 265 contractor towers that are staffed by private companies but administered by FAA through its FAA Contract Tower Program, which was established in 1982. These contract control towers cover 51% of all the Federal air traffic control towers in the U.S.[49]
Another model is to have ATC services provided by a government corporation.  This model is used in Germany, where funding is obtained through user fees.  Yet another model is to have a for-profit corporation operate ATC services.  This is the model used in the United Kingdom, but there have been several issues with the system there, including a large-scale failure in December 2014 which caused delays and cancellations and has been attributed to cost-cutting measures put in place by this corporation.  In fact, earlier that year, the corporation owned by the German government won the bid to provide ATC services for Gatwick Airport in the United Kingdom.[citation needed]The last model, which is often the suggested model for the United States to transition to is to have a non-profit organisation that would handle ATC services as is used in Canada.[50]
The Canadian system is the one most often used as a model by proponents of privatisation.  Air traffic control privatisation has been successful in Canada with the creation of Nav Canada, a private non-profit organisation which has reduced costs, and has allowed new technologies to be deployed faster due to the elimination of much of the bureaucraticred tape.  This has resulted in shorter flights and less fuel usage.  It has also resulted in flights being safer due to new technology.  Nav Canada is funded from fees that are collected from the airlines based on the weight of the aircraft and the distance flown.[51]
Air traffic control is operated by national governments with few exceptions: in theEuropean Union, only Italy has private shareholders.[11]Privatisation does not guarantee lower prices: the profit margin of MUAC was 70% in 2017, as there is no competition, but governments could offer fixed termsconcessions.[11]

## ATC regulations in the United States
The United States airspace is divided into 21 zones (centres), and each zone is divided into sectors. Also within each zone are portions of airspace, about 50 miles (80 kilometres) in diameter, called TRACON (Terminal Radar Approach Control) airspaces. Within each TRACON airspace are a number of airports, each of which has its own airspace with a 5 miles (8.0 kilometres) radius.FAAcontrol tower operators(CTO) /air traffic controllersuseFAA Order 7110.65as the authority for all procedures regarding air traffic.[52]