## Aircraft carrier
Anaircraft carrieris awarshipthat serves as a seagoingairbase, equipped with a full-lengthflight deckandhangarfacilities for supporting, arming, deploying and recoveringshipborne aircraft.[1]Typically it is thecapital shipof afleet(known as acarrier battle group), as it allows anaval forcetoprojectseaborneair powerfar from homeland without depending on localairfieldsforstagingaircraft operations. Since their inception in the early 20th century, aircraft carriers have evolved from wooden vessels used to deploy individual tetheredreconnaissance balloons, tonuclear-poweredsupercarriers that carry dozens offighters,strike aircraft,military helicopters,AEW&Csand other types of aircraft such asUCAVs. While heavierfixed-wing aircraftsuch asairlifters,gunshipsandbombershave been launched from aircraft carriers, these aircraft do not often land on a carrier due to flight deck limitations.
The aircraft carrier, along with its onboard aircraft and defensive ancillary weapons, is the largestweapon systemever created. By their tactical prowess, mobility, autonomy and the variety of operational means, aircraft carriers are often the centerpiece of modernnaval warfare, and have significantdiplomatic influenceindeterrence,command of the seaandair supremacy. Since theSecond World War, the aircraft carrier has replaced thebattleshipin the role offlagshipof a fleet, and largely transformednaval battlesfromgunfireto beyond-visual-rangeair strikes. In addition to tactical aptitudes, it has greatstrategicadvantages in that, by sailing ininternational waters, it does not need to interfere with anyterritorial sovereigntyand thus does not risk diplomatic complications orconflict escalationdue to trespassing, and obviates the need forland useauthorizations from third-party countries, reduces the times and transit logistics of aircraft and therefore significantly increases the time of availability on the combat zone.
There is no single definition of an "aircraft carrier",[citation needed]and modern navies use several variants of the type. These variants are sometimes categorized as sub-types of aircraft carriers,[2]and sometimes as distinct types of aviation-capable ships.[3]Aircraft carriers may be classified according to the type of aircraft they carry and their operational assignments.AdmiralSirMark Stanhope, RN, formerFirst Sea Lord (head)of theRoyal Navy, has said, "To put it simply, countries that aspire to strategic international influence have aircraft carriers."[4]Henry Kissinger, whileUnited States Secretary of State, also said: "An aircraft carrier is 100,000 tons of diplomacy."[5]
As of April 2026, there are 50 active aircraft carriers in the world operated by fifteen navies. TheUnited Stateshas 11 large nuclear-poweredCATOBARfleet carriers– each carrying around 80 fighters – the largest in the world, with the total combined deck space over twice that of all other nations combined.[6]In addition, theUS Navyhas nineamphibious assault shipsused primarily ashelicopter carriers, although these also each carry up to 20vertical/short takeoff and landing(V/STOL)jet fightersand are similar in size to medium-sized fleet carriers.China, theUnited KingdomandIndiaeach currently operate twoSTOBAR/STOVLaircraft carriers withski-jumpflight decks, with China having recently commissioneda third carrierwithcatapultcapabilities, andFranceoperates a single  aircraft carrier with a capacity of around 40 fighters.Italyoperates two light V/STOL carriers, whileSpain,  andIranoperate one V/STOL aircraft-carrying assault ship.Russiadeploys a single carrier, though it has not been operational since 2017. Helicopter carriers are also operated byJapan(4, two of which are being converted to operate V/STOL fighters), France (3),Australia(2, previously also owned 3light carriers),Egypt(2),South Korea(2), China (3),Thailand(1),Brazil(1) andIran(1). Future aircraft carriers are under construction or in planning by China, France, India, Italy, Russia, South Korea, and the US.

## Basic types
Some of the types listed here are not strictly defined as aircraft carriers by some sources.[citation needed]

## By role
Afleet carrieris intended to operate with the main fleet and usually provides an offensive capability. These are the largest carriers capable of fast speeds. By comparison,escort carrierswere developed to provide defense for convoys of ships. They were smaller and slower with lower numbers of aircraft carried. Most were built from mercantile hulls or, in the case ofmerchant aircraft carriers, were bulk cargo ships with a flight deck added on top.Light aircraft carrierswere fast enough to operate with the main fleet but of smaller size with reduced aircraft capacity.
The Soviet aircraft carrierAdmiral Kusnetsovwas termed a "heavy aircraft-carrying cruiser". This was primarily a legal construct to avoid the limitations of theMontreux Conventionpreventing 'aircraft carriers' transiting theTurkish Straitsbetween the SovietBlack Seabases and theMediterranean Sea. These ships, while sized in the range of large fleet carriers, were designed to deploy alone or with escorts. In addition to supporting fighter aircraft and helicopters, they provide both strong defensive weaponry and heavy offensive missiles equivalent to a guided-missile cruiser.

## By configuration
Aircraft carriers today are usually divided into the following four categories based on the way that aircraft take off and land:

## Supercarrier
The appellation "supercarrier" is not an official designation with any national navy, but a term used predominantly by the media and typically when reporting on larger and more advanced carrier types. It is also used when comparing carriers of various sizes and capabilities, both current and past. It was first used byThe New York Timesin 1938,[10]in an article about the Royal Navy'sHMSArk Royal, that had a length of 800 feet (244 m), a displacement of 22,000tonsand was designed to carry 72 aircraft.[11][12]Since then, aircraft carriers have consistently grown in size, both in length and displacement, as well as improved capabilities; in defense, sensors, electronic warfare, propulsion, range, launch and recovery systems, number and types of aircraft carried and number of sorties flown per day.[13]
The first aircraft carrier over 80,000 tonnes full-load displacement was theUSS Forrestallaunched in 1954. In total, the US Navy has had 5 different classes of aircraft carrier of this size definition, theForrestal class,Kitty Hawk class, theEnterprise class, theNimitz classandGerald R Ford Class, two of which were conventional steam-powered and three nuclear-powered. USSEnterprise, launched in 1960, was the first carrier over 90,000 tonnes full load displacement andNimitz, launched in 1972, was the first over 100,000 tonnes displacement. A total of 22 supercarriers have been launched since 1954, all in service with the US Navy, with 11 currently in service.[14][15]
Both China (Type 003) and the United Kingdom (Queen Elizabeth class) have carriers in service with displacements from 80,000[16]to 85,000 tonnes[17]and lengths from 280 to 320 meters (920 to 1,050 ft)[18][19]which are described as "supercarriers".[20][21][17]France is also developing a new aircraft carrier (PANG) which is to have a full load displacement of 80,000 tonnes and will be considered a supercarrier.[22]The largest supercarrier in service as of 2024 is the US Navy's USS Gerald R. Ford, with full load displacement of around 100,000 tons, length of 337 meters (1,106 ft)[23]and capabilities that exceed those of any other class.[29]

## Ultracarrier
A US Navy proposal for an aircraft carrier concept with a length of 1,310 feet and a displacement of 500,000 tons full load at a cost of $828 million in 1976 dollars.[30]
Project Habakkukcould be considered an early proposal for an "ultracarrier".[citation needed]

## Hull type identification symbols
Several systems of identification symbol for aircraft carriers and related types of ship have been used. These include thepennant numbersused by the Royal Navy,Commonwealthcountries, and Europe, along with thehull classification symbolsused by the US andCanada.[31]

## Origins
The 1903 advent of the heavier-than-air fixed-wing airplane with theWright brothers' first flight atKitty Hawk, North Carolina, was followed on 14 November 1910, byEugene Burton Ely's first experimental take-off of aCurtiss Pusherairplane from the deck of aUnited States Navyship, the cruiserUSSBirminghamanchored offNorfolk Navy BaseinVirginia. Two months later, on 18 January 1911, Ely landed his Curtiss Pusher airplane on a platform on the armored cruiserUSSPennsylvaniaanchored inSan Francisco Bay. On 9 May 1912, the first take off of an airplane from a ship while underway was made by CommanderCharles Samsonflying aShort Improved S.27biplane "S.38" of theRoyal Naval Air Service(RNAS) from the deck of the Royal Navy's pre-dreadnought battleshipHMSHibernia, thus providing the first practical demonstration of the aircraft carrier for naval operations at sea.[32][33]Seaplane tendersupport ships came next, with the FrenchFoudreof 1911.
Early inWorld War I, theImperial Japanese NavyshipWakamiyaconducted the world's first carrier-launched air raid:[34]on 6 September 1914, theWakamiyaused its crane to lowerFarmanseaplanes into the water.  TheWakamiyaattacked theAustro-HungariancruiserSMSKaiserin Elisabethand theImperial GermangunboatJaguarinJiaozhou BayoffQingdao; neither was hit.[35]The first attack using an air-launchedtorpedooccurred on 2 August, when a torpedo was fired by Flight CommanderCharles Edmondsfrom aShort Type 184seaplane, launched from the seaplane carrierHMSBen-my-Chree.[36][37]
The first carrier-launched airstrike was theTondern raidin July 1918. SevenSopwith Camelswere launched from the battlecruiserHMSFurious, which had been completed as a carrier by replacing her planned forward turret with a flight deck and hangar prior to commissioning. The Camels attacked and damaged the German airbase at Tondern, Germany (modern dayTønder, Denmark), and destroyed twozeppelin airships.[38]
The first landing of an airplane on a moving ship was by Squadron CommanderEdwin Harris Dunning, when he landed hisSopwith Pupon HMSFuriousinScapa Flow, Orkney, on 2 August 1917. Landing on the forward flight deck required the pilot to approach round the ship's superstructure, a difficult and dangerous manoeuver, and Dunning was later killed when his airplane was thrown overboard while attempting another landing onFurious.[39]HMSFuriouswas modified again when her rear turret was removed and another flight deck added over a second hangar for landing aircraft over the stern.[40]Her funnel and superstructure remained intact, however, andturbulencefrom the funnel and superstructure was severe enough that only three landing attempts were successful before further attempts were forbidden.[41]This experience prompted the development of vessels with a flush deck and produced the first large fleet ships. In 1918,HMSArgusbecame the world's first carrier capable of launching and recovering naval aircraft.[42]
As a result of theWashington Naval Treatyof 1922, which limited the construction of new heavy surface combat ships, most early aircraft carriers were conversions of ships that were laid down (or had served) as different ship types: cargo ships, cruisers, battlecruisers, or battleships. These conversions gave rise to theUSSLangleyin 1922, the USLexington-classaircraft carriers (1927), JapaneseAkagiandKaga, and BritishCourageousclass(of whichFuriouswas one). Specialist carrier evolution was well underway, with several navies ordering and building warships that were purposefully designed to function as aircraft carriers by the mid-1920s. This resulted in the commissioning of ships such as the JapaneseHōshō(1922),[43]HMSHermes(1924, although laid down in 1918 beforeHōshō), andBéarn(1927). DuringWorld War II, these ships would become known asfleet carriers.[citation needed]

## World War II
The aircraft carrier dramatically changednaval warfarein World War II, because air power was becoming a significant factor in warfare. The advent of aircraft as focal weapons was driven by the superior range, flexibility, and effectiveness of carrier-launched aircraft. They had greater range and precision than naval guns, making them highly effective. The versatility of the carrier was demonstrated in November 1940, whenHMSIllustriouslaunched a long-rangestrike on the Italian fleetat their base inTaranto, signalling the beginning of the effective and highly mobile aircraft strikes. This operation in the shallow water harbor incapacitated three of the six anchored battleships at a cost of two torpedo bombers.
World War II in the Pacific Oceaninvolved clashes between aircraft carrier fleets. The Japanese surprise attack on the American Pacific fleet atPearl Harbornaval and air bases on Sunday, 7 December 1941, was a clear illustration of the power projection capability afforded by a large force of modern carriers. Concentrating six carriers in a single unit turned naval history about, as no other nation had fielded anything comparable. In the "Doolittle Raid", on 18 April 1942, the US Navy carrierUSSHornetsailed to within 650 nautical miles (1,200 km) of Japan and launched 16B-25 Mitchellmedium bombers from her deck in a demonstrative retaliatory strike on the mainland, including the capital, Tokyo. However, the vulnerability of carriers compared to traditional capital ships was illustrated by the sinking ofHMSGloriousby German battleships during theNorwegian campaignin 1940.
This new-found importance ofnaval aviationforced nations to create a number of carriers, in efforts to provide air superiority cover for every major fleet to ward off enemy aircraft. This extensive usage led to the development and construction of 'light' carriers.Escort aircraft carriers, such asUSSBogue, were sometimes purpose-built but most were converted from merchant ships as a stop-gap measure to provide anti-submarine air support for convoys and amphibious invasions. Following this concept,light aircraft carriersbuilt by the US, such asUSSIndependence(commissioned in 1943), represented a larger, more "militarized" version of the escort carrier. Although with similar complement to escort carriers, they had the advantage of speed from their converted cruiser hulls. The UK1942 Design Light Fleet Carrierwas designed for building quickly by civilian shipyards and with an expected service life of about 3 years.[45]They served the Royal Navy during the war, and the hull design was chosen for nearly all aircraft carrier equipped navies after the war, until the 1980s. Emergencies also spurred the creation or conversion of highly unconventional aircraft carriers.CAM shipswere cargo-carrying merchant ships that could launch (but not retrieve) a single fighter aircraft from a catapult to defend the convoy from long range land-based German aircraft. Noteworthy converted carriers were alsoUSSSable(IX-81)andUSSWolverine(IX-64)that both operated on theGreat Lakesfor training duties and were converted frompaddle steamers, making them the only aircraft carriers with this type of propulsion.

## Postwar era
Before World War II, international naval treaties of1922,1930, and1936limited the size of capital ships, including carriers. Since World War II, aircraft carrier designs have increased in size to accommodate a steady increase in aircraft size. The large, modernNimitzclassof US Navy carriers has a displacement nearly four times that of the World War II–eraUSSEnterprise, yet its complement of aircraft is roughly the same—a consequence of the steadily increasing size and weight of individual military aircraft over the years. Today's aircraft carriers are so expensive that some nations which operate them risk significant economic and military impact if a carrier is lost.[46]
Some changes were made after 1945 in carriers:
Modern navies that operate such aircraft carriers treat them ascapital shipsof fleets, a role previously held by the galleons, ships-of-the-line andbattleships. This change took place during World War II in response to air power becoming a significant factor in warfare, driven by the superior range, flexibility and effectiveness of carrier-launched aircraft. Following the war, carrier operations continued to increase in size and importance, and along with, carrier designs also increased in size and ability. Some of these larger carriers, dubbed by the media as "supercarriers", displacing 75,000 tons or greater, have become the pinnacle of carrier development. Some are powered bynuclear reactorsand form the core of a fleet designed to operate far from home. Amphibious assault ships, such as theWaspandMistralclasses, serve the purpose of carrying and landing Marines, and operate a large contingent of helicopters for that purpose. Also known as "commando carriers"[52]or "helicopter carriers", many have the capability to operateVSTOLaircraft.
The threatening role of aircraft carriers has a place in modernasymmetric warfare, like thegunboat diplomacyof the past.[citation needed]Carriers also facilitate quick and precise projections of overwhelming military power into such local and regional conflicts.[53]
Lacking the firepower of other warships, carriers by themselves are considered vulnerable to attack by other ships, aircraft, submarines, or missiles. Therefore, an aircraft carrier is generally accompanied by a number of other ships to provide protection for the relatively unwieldy carrier, to carry supplies, re-supply (Many carriers are self-sufficient and will supply their escorts) and perform other support services, and to provide additional offensive capabilities. The resulting group of ships is often termed acarrier strike group, battle group, carrier group, orcarrier battle group.
There is a view among some military pundits[who?]that modern anti-ship weapons systems, such as torpedoes and missiles, or even ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads have made aircraft carriers and carrier groups too vulnerable for modern combat.[54]
Carriers can also be vulnerable to diesel-electric submarines like the GermanU24of the conventional206 classwhich in 2001 "fired" atEnterpriseduring the exerciseJTFEX 01-2in theCaribbean Seaby firingflaresand taking a photograph through itsperiscope[55]or theSwedish NavysubmarineGotland, which managed the same feat in 2006 duringJTFEX 06-2by penetrating the defensive measures ofCarrier Strike Group 7which was protectingUSSRonald Reagan.[56]

## Structure
Carriers are large and long ships, although there is a high degree of variation depending on their intended role andaircraft complement. The size of the carrier has varied over history and amongnavies, to cater to the various roles that global climates have demanded fromnaval aviation.
Regardless of size, the ship itself must house their complement of aircraft, with space for launching, storing, and maintaining them. Space is also required for the large crew, supplies (food, munitions, fuel, engineering parts), and propulsion. US and French aircraft carriers are notable for havingnuclear reactorspowering their systems and propulsion.
The top of the carrier is the flight deck, where aircraft are launched and recovered. On the starboard side of this is the island, where ship navigation from thebridgeand air traffic control from flyco are controlled and (in non-nuclear powered vessels), provides the location of the ship's funnel(s). TheQueen Elizabeth-classhas two island structures; the forward island contains the navigation bridge, while the aft structure houses flyco.
The constraints of constructing a flight deck strongly affect the role of a given carrier, as they influence the weight, type, and configuration of the aircraft that may be launched. For example, assisted launch mechanisms are used primarily for heavy aircraft, especially those loaded with air-to-ground weapons. CATOBAR is most commonly used on US Navy fleet carriers as it allows the deployment of heavy jets with full load-outs, especially on ground-attack missions. STOVL is used by other navies because it is cheaper to operate and still provides good deployment capability forfighter aircraft.
Due to the busy nature of the flight deck, only 20 or so aircraft may be on it at any one time. A hangar storage several decks below the flight deck is where most aircraft are kept, and aircraft are taken from the lower storage decks to the flight deck through the use of an elevator. The hangar is usually quite large and can take up several decks of vertical space.[57]
Munitions are commonly stored on the lower decks because they are highly explosive. Usually this is below the waterline so that the area can be flooded in case of emergency.

## Flight deck
As "runways at sea", aircraft carriers have a flat-topflight deck, whichlaunchesandrecoversaircraft. Aircraft launch forward, into the wind, and are recovered from astern. Creating such a surface at sea poses constraints on the carrier. For example, the size of the vessel is a fundamental limitation on runway length. This affects take-off procedure, as a shorter runway length of the deck requires that aircraftacceleratemore quickly to gain lift. This either requires a thrust boost, a vertical component to its velocity, or a reduced take-off load (to lower mass). The differing types of deck configuration, as above, influence the structure of the flight deck. The form of launch assistance a carrier provides is strongly related to the types of aircraft embarked and the design of the carrier itself.
There are two main philosophies to keep the deck short: add thrust to the aircraft, such as using a Catapult Assisted Take-Off (CATO-); and changing the direction of the airplanes' thrust, as in Vertical and/or Short Take-Off (V/STO-). Each method has advantages and disadvantages of its own:
On the recovery side of the flight deck, the adaptation to the aircraft load-out is mirrored. Non-VTOL or conventional aircraft cannot decelerate on their own, and almost all carriers using them must have arrested-recovery systems (-BAR, e.g. CATOBAR or STOBAR) to recover their aircraft. Aircraft that are landing extend atailhookthat catches onarrestor wiresstretched across the deck to bring themselves to a stop in a short distance. Post-World War II Royal Navy research on safer CATOBAR recovery eventually led to universal adoption of a landing area angled off axis to allow aircraft who missed the arresting wires to "bolt" and safely return to flight for another landing attempt rather than crashing into aircraft on the forward deck.[58]
If the aircraft are VTOL-capable or helicopters, they do not need to decelerate and hence there is no such need. The arrested-recovery system has used an angled deck since the 1950s because, in case the aircraft does not catch the arresting wire, the short deck allows easier take off by reducing the number of objects between the aircraft and the end of the runway. It also has the advantage of separating the recovery operation area from the launch area.Helicoptersand aircraft capable of vertical or short take-off and landing (V/STOL) usually recover by coming abreast of the carrier on the port side and then using their hover capability to move over the flight deck and land vertically without the need for arresting gear.

## Staff and deck operations
Carriers steam at speed, up to 35knots(65 km/h; 40 mph) into the wind during flight deck operations to increase wind speed over the deck to a safe minimum. This increase in effective wind speed provides a higher launch airspeed for aircraft at the end of the catapult stroke or ski-jump, as well as making recovery safer by reducing the difference between the relative speeds of the aircraft and ship.
Since the early 1950s on conventional carriers it has been the practice to recover aircraft at an angle to port of the axial line of the ship. The primary function of this angled deck is to allow aircraft that miss the arresting wires, referred to as abolter, to become airborne again without the risk of hitting aircraft parked forward. The angled deck allows the installation of one or two "waist" catapults in addition to the two bow cats. An angled deck also improveslaunch and recovery cycleflexibility with the option of simultaneous launching and recovery of aircraft.
Conventional ("tailhook") aircraft rely upon alanding signal officer(LSO, radio call sign 'paddles') to monitor the aircraft's approach, visually gauge glideslope, attitude, and airspeed, and transmit that data to the pilot. Before the angled deck emerged in the 1950s, LSOs used colored paddles to signal corrections to the pilot (hence the nickname). From the late 1950s onward, visual landing aids such as theoptical landing systemhave provided information on properglide slope, but LSOs still transmit voice calls to approaching pilots by radio.
Key personnel involved in the flight deck include the shooters, the handler, and the air boss. Shooters arenaval aviatorsornaval flight officersand are responsible for launching aircraft. The handler works just inside the island from the flight deck and is responsible for the movement of aircraft before launching and after recovery. The "air boss" (usually acommander) occupies the top bridge (Primary Flight Control, also calledprimaryorthe tower) and has the overall responsibility for controlling launch, recovery and "those aircraft in the air near the ship, and the movement of planes on the flight deck, which itself resembles a well-choreographed ballet".[59]The captain of the ship spends most of his time one level below primary on the Navigation Bridge. Below this is the Flag Bridge, designated for the embarked admiral and his staff.
To facilitate working on the flight deck of a US aircraft carrier, the sailors wear colored shirts that designate their responsibilities. There are at least seven different colors worn by flight deck personnel formodern United States Navy carrier air operations. Carrier operations of other nations use similar color schemes.

## Deck structures
The superstructure of a carrier (such as thebridge, flightcontrol tower) are concentrated in a relatively small area called anisland, a feature pioneered onHMSHermesin 1923. While the island is usually built on thestarboardside of the flight deck, the Japanese aircraft carriersAkagiandHiryūhad their islands built on theportside. Very few carriers have been designed or built without an island. Theflush deckconfiguration proved to have significant drawbacks, primary of which was management of the exhaust from the power plant. Fumes coming across the deck were a major issue inUSSLangley. In addition, lack of an island meant difficulties managing the flight deck, performing air traffic control, a lack of radar housing placements and problems with navigating and controlling the ship itself.[60]
Another deck structure that can be seen is aski-jump rampat the forward end of the flight deck. This was first developed to help launchshort take off vertical landing(STOVL) aircraft take off at far higher weights than is possible with a vertical or rolling takeoff on flat decks. Originally developed by the Royal Navy, it since has been adopted by many navies for smaller carriers. A ski-jump ramp works by converting some of the forward rolling movement of the aircraft into vertical velocity and is sometimes combined with the aiming of jet thrust partly downward. This allows heavily loaded and fueled aircraft a few more precious seconds to attain sufficient air velocity and lift to sustain normal flight. Without a ski-jump, launching fully-loaded and fueled aircraft such as the Harrier would not be possible on a smaller flat deck ship before eitherstalling outor crashing directly into the sea.
Although STOVL aircraft are capable of taking off vertically from a spot on the deck, using the ramp and a running start is far more fuel efficient and permits a heavier launch weight. As catapults are unnecessary, carriers with this arrangement reduce weight, complexity, and space needed for complex steam or electromagnetic launching equipment. Vertical landing aircraft also remove the need for arresting cables and related hardware. Russian, Chinese, and Indian carriers include a ski-jump ramp for launching lightly loaded conventional fighter aircraft but recover using traditional carrier arresting cables and a tailhook on their aircraft.
The disadvantage of the ski-jump is the penalty it exacts on aircraft size, payload, and fuel load (and thus range); heavily laden aircraft cannot launch using a ski-jump because their high loaded weight requires either a longer takeoff roll than is possible on a carrier deck, or assistance from a catapult orJATOrocket. For example, the RussianSukhoi Su-33is only able to launch from the carrierAdmiral Kuznetsovwith a minimal armament and fuel load. Another disadvantage is on mixed flight deck operations where helicopters are also present, such as on a USlanding helicopter dockorlanding helicopter assaultamphibious assault ship. A ski jump is not included as this would eliminate one or more helicopter landing areas; this flat deck limits the loading of Harriers but is somewhat mitigated by the longer rolling start provided by a long flight deck compared to many STOVL carriers.

## National fleets
The US Navy has the largest fleet of carriers in the world, with eleven supercarriers in service as of 2024. China has one CATOBAR carrier and two STOBAR carriers in service. India has two STOBAR carriers in service. The UK has two STOVL carriers in service. The navies of France and Russia each operate a single medium-sized carrier.[a]The US also has nine similarly sized Amphibious Warfare Ships. There are five small light carriers in use capable of operating both fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters; Japan and Italy each operate two, and Spain one.
Additionally there are nineteen small carriers which only operate helicopters serving the navies of Algeria (1), Australia (2), Brazil (1), China (2), Egypt (2), France (3), Japan (4), South Korea (2), Thailand (1), Turkey (1), and Iran (1).[citation needed]

## Algeria
Kalaat Béni Abbès(L-474) is anamphibious transport dock[61]of theAlgerian National Navywith two deck-landing spots for helicopters.

## Australia
TheRoyal Australian Navyoperates twoCanberra-class landing helicopter docks. The two-ship class, based on the Spanish vesselJuan Carlos Iand built byNavantiaandBAE Systems Australia, represents the largest ships ever built for the Royal Australian Navy.[62]
HMASCanberraunderwentsea trialsin late 2013 and was commissioned in 2014. Hersister ship,HMASAdelaide, was commissioned in December 2015. The Australian ships retain the ski-ramp from theJuan Carlos Idesign, although the RAN has not acquired carrier-based fixed-wing aircraft.

## Brazil
In December 2017, theBrazilian Navyconfirmed the purchase ofHMSOceanfor (GBP) £84.6 million (equivalent to R$359.5M and US$113.2M) and renamed herAtlântico. The ship was decommissioned from Royal Navy service in March 2018. TheBrazilian Navycommissioned the carrier on 29 June 2018 in the United Kingdom. After undertaking a period of maintenance in the UK, the ship travelled to its new home port,Arsenal de Marinha do Rio de Janeiro(AMRJ) to be fully operational by 2020.[63][64][65]The ship displaces 21,578 tonnes, is 203.43 meters (667.4 ft) long and has a range of 8,000 nautical miles (15,000 km; 9,200 mi).[66][67]
Before leavingHMNB Devonportfor her new homeport in Rio's AMRJ,Atlânticounderwent operational sea training under the Royal Navy's Flag Officer Sea Training (FOST) program.[68][69]
On 12 November 2020,Atlânticowas redesignated "NAM", for "multipurpose aircraft carrier" (Portuguese:Navio Aeródromo Multipropósito), from "PHM", for "multipurpose helicopter carrier" (Portuguese:Porta-Helicópteros Multipropósito), to reflect the ship's capability to operate with fixed-wingmedium-altitude long-endurance unmanned aerial vehiclesas well as crewedtiltrotorVTOLaircraft.[70]

## China
TwoSTOBARcarriers:
One CATOBAR carrier:
FourLHDamphibious assault ships
China has had a long-term plan to operate six large aircraft carriers with two carriers per fleet.[84]
China is planning a class of eight LHD vessels, the Type 075 (NATO reporting nameYushen-classlanding helicopter assault). This is a class ofamphibious assault shipunder construction by theHudong–Zhonghua Shipbuildingcompany.[81]The first ship was commissioned in April 2021.[81]China is also planning a modified class of the same concept, theType 076 landing helicopter dock, that will be equipped with anelectromagnetic catapultsystem[85]and will likely support launchingunmanned combat aerial vehicles.

## Egypt
Egypt signed a contract with French shipbuilderDCNSto buy twoMistral-classhelicopter carriers for approximately 950 million euros. The two ships were originally to be sold to Russia, but the deal was cancelled by France due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2014.[86]
On 2 June 2016, Egypt received the first of two helicopter carriers acquired in October 2015, the landing helicopter dockGamal Abdel Nasser. The flag transfer ceremony took place in the presence of Egyptian and French Navies' chiefs of staff, chairman and chief executive officers of both DCNS and STX France, and senior Egyptian and French officials.[87]On 16 September 2016, DCNS delivered the second of two helicopter carriers, the landing helicopter dockAnwar El Sadatwhich also participated in a jointmilitary exercisewith the French Navy before arriving at her home port ofAlexandria.[88]

## France
TheFrench Navyoperates the 42,000-tonne nuclear-powered aircraft carrier,Charles de Gaulle. Commissioned in 2001, she is the flagship of the French Navy. The ship carries a complement ofDassault RafaleM andE-2C Hawkeyeaircraft,EC725 CaracalandAS532 Cougarhelicopters forcombat search and rescue, as well as modern electronics andAstermissiles. She is aCATOBAR-type carrier that uses two 75 m C13-3 steam catapults of a shorter version of the catapult system installed on the USNimitz-classcarriers, one catapult at the bow and one across the front of the landing area.[citation needed]In addition, the French Navy operates threeMistral-class landing helicopter docks.[89]
In October 2018, the French Ministry of Defence began an 18-month €40 million study for the replacement of the French aircraft carrierCharles de Gaullesometime after 2030. In December 2020, President Macron announced that construction of thenext generation carrierwould begin in around 2025 with sea trials to start in about 2036. The carrier is planned to have a displacement of around 75,000 tons and to carry about 32 next-generation fighters, two to three E-2D Advanced Hawkeyes and a yet-to-be-determined number of unmanned carrier air vehicles.[90]

## India
TwoSTOBARcarriers:
INSVikramaditya, 45,400 tonnes,modifiedKievclass. The carrier was purchased by India on 20 January 2004 after years of negotiations at a final price of $2.35 billion. The ship successfully completed her sea trials in July 2013 and aviation trials in September 2013. She was formally commissioned on 16 November 2013 at a ceremony held at Severodvinsk, Russia.[91]
INSVikrant, also known asIndigenous Aircraft Carrier 1 (IAC-1)a 45,000-tonne, 262-metre-long (860 ft)[92]aircraft carrier whose keel was laid in 2009.[93]The new carrier will operateMiG-29Kand navalHAL Tejasaircraft.[93]The ship is powered by gas-turbines and deploys 10 helicopters and 30 aircraft.[94]The ship was launched in 2013, sea-trials began in August 2021 and was commissioned on 2 September 2022.[95][96]
India has plans for a third carrier,INSVishal, also known asIndigenous Aircraft Carrier 2 (IAC-2)with a displacement of over 65,000 tonnes and is planned with aCATOBARsystem to launch and recover heavier aircraft.[97]
India has also issued a request for information (RFI) to procure fourLanding helicopter dockdisplacing 30,000–40,000 tons with a capacity to operate 12 medium lift special ops and two heavy lift helicopters and troops for amphibious operations.[98]

## Italy
One STOVL carrier:
One LHD Amphibious Assault Ship:
Triesteis to carry the F-35B Joint Strike Fighter.[100][101]In 2026, it was announced that theGiuseppe Garibaldiwill be transferred to theIndonesian Navy.[102]

## Iran
On February 6, 2025, theIslamic Revolutionary Guards Corps(IRGC) accepted theIRISShahid Bagheri, a 41,978-tonnedrone UAV carrierconverted from acontainer ship.[103][104]

## Japan
In December 2018, the Japanese Cabinet gave approval to convert bothIzumo-classdestroyers into aircraft carriers for F-35BSTOVLoperations.[105]The conversion ofIzumowas underway as of mid-2020.[106]The modification of maritime escort vessels is to "increase operational flexibility" and enhance Pacific air defense,[107][108]the Japanese defense ministry's position is "We are not creating carrier air wings or carrier air squadrons" similar to the US Navy.[citation needed]The Japanese STOVL F-35s, when delivered, will be operated by theJapan Air Self Defense Forcefrom land bases; according to the 2020 Japanese Defense Ministry white paper the STOVL model was chosen for the JASDF due the lack of appropriately long runways to support air superiority capability across all of Japanese airspace.[109][110]Japan has requested that the USMC deploy STOVL F-35s and crews aboard theIzumo-classships "for cooperation and advice on how to operate the fighter on the deck of the modified ships".[111][107]On 3 October 2021, two USMC F-35Bs performed the first vertical landings and horizontal take-offs from JSIzumo, marking 75 years since fixed-wing aircraft operated from a Japanese carrier.[112]

## Russia
One STOBAR carrier:Admiral Flota Sovetskogo Soyuza Kuznetsov: 55,000-tonneKuznetsov-classSTOBARaircraft carrier. Launched in 1985 asTbilisi, renamed and operational from 1995. Without catapults she can launch and recover lightly fueled naval fighters for air defense or anti-ship missions but not heavy conventional bombing strikes.[citation needed]Officially designated an aircraft carrying cruiser, she is unique in carrying a heavy cruiser's complement of defensive weapons and largeP-700 Granitoffensive missiles. The P-700[114]systems will be removed in the coming refit to enlarge her below decks aviation facilities as well as upgrading her defensive systems.[115]
The ship has been out of service and in repairs since 2018. The most recent projection stated that repairs would be completed and the ship transferred back to the Russian Navy sometime in 2024, however this projection has not been met as of July 2025, and no updates have been provided.[116][117]
The Russian government has been considering the potential replacement ofAdmiral Kuznetsovfor some time and has considered theShtorm-class aircraft carrieras a possible option. This carrier will be a hybrid of CATOBAR and STOBAR, given the fact that she uses both systems of launching aircraft. The carrier is expected to costbetween $1.8 billion and $5.63 billion.[clarification needed][118]As of 2020, the project had not yet been approved and, given the financial costs, it was unclear whether it would be made a priority over other elements of Russian naval modernization.
A class of 2 LHD,Project 23900is planned and an official keel laying ceremony for the project happened on 20 July 2020.[119]

## South Korea
TwoDokdo-class18,860-tonne full deck amphibious assault ships with hospital and well deck and facilities to serve as fleet flagships.
South Korea had set tentative plans for procuring two light aircraft carriers by 2033, which would help make the ROKN a blue water navy.[120][121]In December 2020, details of South Korea's planned carrier program (CVX) were finalized. A vessel of about 40,000 tons is envisaged carrying about 20 F-35B fighters as well as future maritime attack helicopters. Service entry had been anticipated in the early 2030s.[122]Basic design work was to start in 2022.[123]In 2025 the program was cancelled and replaced with adrone carrierprogram.[124]

## Spain
Juan Carlos I: a 27,000-tonne, specially designed multipurpose strategic projection ship which can operate as anamphibious assault shipand as an aircraft carrier. Juan Carlos I has full facilities for both functions including aski jumpforSTOVLoperations, is equipped with theAV-8B Harrier IIattack aircraft. She also features awell deckand a vehicle storage area which can be used as additional hangar space. The vessel was launched in 2008 and commissioned on 30 September 2010.[125]

## Thailand
One offshore helicopter support ship:HTMSChakri Naruebethelicopter carrier: 11,400-tonne STOVL carrier based on SpanishPríncipe de Asturiasdesign. Commissioned in 1997. The AV-8S Matador/Harrier STOVL fighter wing, mostly inoperable by 1999,[126]was retired from service without replacement in 2006.[127]As of 2010, the ship is used for helicopter operations and for disaster relief.[128]

## Turkey
TCGAnadoluis a 27,079-tonneamphibious assault ship(LHD) (outfitted asdrone carrier) of theTurkish Navythat can be configured as a 24,660-tonne V/STOL aircraft carrier.[129]Construction began on 30 April 2016 by Sedef Shipbuilding Inc. at theirIstanbulshipyard.[130][131]TCGAnadoluwas commissioned with a ceremony on 10 April 2023.[132][133]The construction of a sister ship, to be named TCGTrakya, is currently being planned by the Turkish Navy.[134][135]
TheSikorsky S-70B Seahawkand theBell AH-1 SuperCobraare the two main types of helicopters used on TCGAnadolu, with the occasional use ofCH-47F Chinookhelicopters of theTurkish Armyduring military exercises and operations.[136]The AH-1W Super Cobras will eventually be complemented and replaced by theTAI T929 ATAK 2.[137]
Thejet-powered,low-observabledroneBayraktar MIUS Kızılelma[133][138][139]and theMALEUAVBayraktar TB3[140][141][142]are twoUCAVsthat are specifically designed and manufactured byBaykar Technologiesto be used on TCGAnadolu.[143]The maiden flight ofTAI Anka-3(also part of Project MIUS), a jet-powered,flying wingtype UCAV with stealth technology, was successfully completed on 28 December 2023.[144][145][146]
On 19 November 2024,Baykar Bayraktar TB3UCAV successfully took-off from the flight deck of TCGAnadoluand landed on the ship.[147][148][149]It was the first time a fixed-wing unmanned aircraft of this size and class had successfully landed on a short-runwaylanding helicopter dock, without the use of anarresting gear.[150][148][149]
On 3 January 2024, the Turkish government approved the plan for the design and construction of a larger aircraft carrier,[154]named theMUGEM-class.[155]
On 15 February 2024, the Design and Projects Office of the Turkish Navy announced that it will be a STOBAR aircraft carrier with an overall length of 285 metres (935 ft),[155]beam of 72 metres (236 ft),[155]draught of 10.1 metres (33 ft),[155]and displacement of 60,000 tons.[155]It is to have a COGAG[155]propulsion system and a maximum speed of more than 25 knots (29 mph; 46 km/h).[155]
The construction of the firstMUGEM-class aircraft carrier began on 2 January 2025.[151][153][152]The firstMUGEM-class aircraft carrier is being built at theIstanbul Naval Shipyard.[151][153][152]

## United Kingdom
Two 80,600-tonne (est. full load)[156]Queen Elizabeth-classSTOVL carriers which operate the F-35 Lightning II.HMSQueen Elizabethwas commissioned in December 2017[157]andHMSPrince of Walesin December 2019.
Queen Elizabethundertook her first operational deployment in 2021.[158]EachQueen Elizabeth-class ship is able to operate around 40 aircraft during peacetime operations and is thought to be able to carry up to 72 at maximum capacity.[159]As of the end of April 2020, 18 F-35B aircraft had been delivered to the Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force. "Full operating capability" for the UK's carrier strike capability had been planned for 2023 (two squadrons or 24 jets operating from one carrier).[160]The longer-term aim remains for the ability to conduct a wide range of air operations and support amphibious operations worldwide from both carriers by 2026.[160]They form the central part of theUK Carrier Strike Group. TheQueen Elizabeth-class ships are expected to have service lives of 50 years.[161]

## United States
Eleven CATOBAR carriers, all nuclear-powered:
Nine amphibious assault ships carrying vehicles, Marine fighters, attack and transport helicopters, and landing craft with STOVL fighters forClose Air Support (CAS)andCombat Air Patrol (CAP):
The current US fleet ofNimitz-class carriers will be followed into service (and in some cases replaced) by theGerald R. Fordclass. It is expected that the ships will be more automated in an effort to reduce the amount of funding required to maintain and operate the vessels. The main new features are implementation ofElectromagnetic Aircraft Launch System(EMALS) (which replaces the old steam catapults) andunmanned aerial vehicles.[162]In terms of future carrier developments, Congress has discussed the possibility of accelerating the phasing-out of one or moreNimitz-class carriers, postponing or canceling the procurement of CVN-81 and CVN-82, or modifying the purchase contract.[163]
Following the deactivation ofUSSEnterprisein December 2012, the US fleet comprised 10 fleet carriers, but that number increased back to 11 with the commissioning ofGerald R. Fordin July 2017. TheHouse Armed Services Seapower subcommitteeon 24 July 2007, recommended seven or eight new carriers (one every four years). However, the debate has deepened over budgeting for the $12–14.5 billion (plus $12 billion for development and research) for the 100,000-tonneGerald R. Ford-class carrier (estimated service 2017) compared to the smaller $2 billion 45,000-tonneAmerica-class amphibious assault ships, which are able to deploy squadrons of F-35Bs. The first of this class,USSAmerica, is now in active service with another,USSTripoli, and 9 more are planned.[164][165]
In a report to Congress in February 2018, the Navy stated it intends to maintain a "12CVNforce" as part of its 30-year acquisition plan.[166]

## Current museum carriers
A few aircraft carriers have been preserved as museum ships. They are:

## Popular culture
Aircraft carriers are prominently portrayed in a number of Hollywood films includingMidway(2019) and the carrierUSSNimitzis centrally featured in the science fiction filmThe Final Countdown(1980).[172]The original film version about the Battle at Midway was made in England and titledMidway(1976). Aircraft carriers are prominently featured in bothTop GunandTop Gun: Maverickas providing the launch sites and mission operations support for the fighter operations seen in both films.[173]The Japanese aircraft carriers involved in theattack on Pearl Harborare featured in the 1970 filmTora! Tora! Tora!as well as the more recent film from 2001Pearl Harbor. The carrierUSSRonald Reaganmakes a cameo appearance at the end of the 2012 science fiction filmBattleship. In the 2025 filmMission: Impossible – The Final Reckoning, the aircraft carrierUSSGeorge Bushis featured as delivering its special agent to a submarine rendezvous with the nuclear-poweredUSSOhioin the Bering Straits by Alaska. The 50-minute documentary titledCity of Steel: Carrierwas released by the Discovery Channel in 2000 covering the final months of building and inspecting theUSSHarry Trumanthrough its commissioning by PresidentBill Clinton.[174]

## Related lists
Seelist of aircraft carriers in servicefor a summery of current carriers by country.