## Aluminium
Aluminium(theCommonwealthandpreferred IUPAC name) oraluminum(North American English) is achemical element; it hassymbolAlandatomic number13. It has a density lower than other commonmetals, about one-third that ofsteel. Aluminium has a great affinity towardoxygen,forming a protective layerofoxideon the surface when exposed to air. It visually resemblessilver, both in its color and in its great ability to reflect light. It is soft,nonmagnetic, andductile. It has one stableisotope,27Al, which is highly abundant, making aluminium the12th-most abundant elementin the universe. Theradioactivityof26Alleads to it being used inradiometric dating.
Chemically, aluminium is apost-transition metalin theboron group; as is common for the group, aluminium forms compounds primarily in the +3oxidation state. The aluminiumcationAl3+issmall and highly charged; as such, it has morepolarizing power, andbondsformed by aluminium have a morecovalentcharacter. The strong affinity of aluminium for oxygen leads to the common occurrence of its oxides in nature. Aluminium is found on Earth primarily in rocks in thecrust, where it is thethird-most abundant elementafteroxygenandsilicon, rather than in themantle, and virtually never as thefree metal. It is obtained industrially by miningbauxite, asedimentary rockrich in aluminiumminerals.
The discovery of aluminium was announced in 1825 by Danish physicistHans Christian Ørsted. The first industrial production of aluminium was initiated by French chemistHenri Étienne Sainte-Claire Devillein 1856. Aluminium became much more available to the public with theHall–Héroult processdeveloped independently by French engineerPaul Héroultand American engineerCharles Martin Hallin 1886, and the mass production of aluminium led to its extensive use in industry and everyday life. In 1954, aluminium became the most producednon-ferrous metal, surpassingcopper. In the 21st century, most aluminium was consumed in transportation, engineering, construction, and packaging in theUnited States, Western Europe, andJapan. The standard atomic weight of aluminium is low in comparison with many other metals,[b]giving it the low density responsible for many of its uses.
Despite its prevalence in the environment, no living thing is known tometabolizealuminiumsalts, but aluminium is well tolerated by plants and animals. Because of the abundance of these salts, the potential for a biological role for them is of interest, and studies are ongoing.

## Isotopes
Aluminium has onestableisotope,27Al, which comprises virtually all of the naturally-occurring element. This is common for elements with an odd atomic number.[c]It is therefore amononuclidic elementforstandard atomic weight, which is determined completely by that isotope. Aluminium is useful innuclear magnetic resonance(NMR), as its single stable isotope (thoughquadrupolar) has a high NMR sensitivity.[15]
All other isotopes of aluminium areradioactive. The most stable of these is26Al, with ahalf-lifeof 717,000 years. While it was present along with stable27Al in the interstellar medium from which the Solar System formed (believed to have been produced bystellar nucleosynthesisalso), no detectable amount could have survived the time since the formation of the planet. However, minute traces of26Al are still produced from decay ofargonin theatmosphereinduced byionizing radiationofcosmic rays. The ratio of26Al to10Behas been used for theradiodatingof geological processes over 105to 106year time scales, in particular transport, deposition,sedimentstorage, burial times, and erosion.[16]Most meteorite scientists believe that the energy released by the decay of26Al was responsible for the melting anddifferentiationof someasteroidsafter their formation 4.55 billion years ago.[17]
The other known isotopes of aluminium, withmass numbersranging from 20 to 43, all have half-lives less than 7 minutes, as do the four detectedmetastablestates.[18]

## Electron shell
An aluminium atom has 13 electrons with anelectron configurationof[Ne] 3s23p1,[19]with three electrons beyond a stablenoble gasconfiguration. Accordingly, the combined first threeionization energiesof aluminium are far lower than the fourthionization energyalone.[20]Such an electron configuration is shared with the other well-characterized members of its group,boron,gallium,indium, andthallium; it is also expected fornihonium. Aluminium can surrender its three outermost electrons in many chemical reactions (seebelow). Theelectronegativityof aluminium is 1.61 on the Pauling scale.[21]
A free aluminium atom has anatomic radiusof 143pm.[22]With the three outermost electrons removed, theradiusshrinks to 39 pm for a 4-coordinated atom or 53.5 pm for a 6-coordinated atom.[22]Atstandard temperature and pressure, aluminium atoms (when not affected by atoms of other elements) form aface-centered cubic crystal systembound bymetallic bondingprovided by atoms' outermost electrons; hence, aluminium (at these conditions) is a metal.[23]This crystal system is shared by many other metals, such asleadandcopper; the size of a unit cell of aluminium is comparable to that of those other metals.[23]This system, however, is not shared by the other members of its group: boron has ionization energies too high to allow metallization, thallium has ahexagonal close-packedstructure, and gallium and indium have unusual structures that are not close-packed like those of aluminium and thallium. The few electrons that are available for metallic bonding in aluminium are a probable cause for it beingsoftwith a low melting point and lowelectrical resistivity.[24]

## Bulk
Aluminium metal has an appearance ranging from silvery white to dull gray depending on itssurface roughness.[d]Aluminium mirrors provides high reflectivity for light in theultraviolet, visible (on par with silver),[27]and farinfraredregions.[28]Aluminium is also good at reflectingsolar radiation, although prolonged exposure to sunlight in air can deteriorate the reflectivity of the metal;[27]this may be prevented if aluminium isanodized, which adds a protective layer of oxide on the surface.[29]
The density of aluminium is 2.70 g/cm3, about one-third that of steel, much lower than other commonly encountered metals, making aluminium parts easily identifiable through their lightness.[30]Aluminium's low density compared to most other metals arises from the fact that its unit cell size is relatively large in proportion to the number of nucleons. The only lighter metals are the metals ofgroups 1and2, which, apart fromberylliumandmagnesium, are too reactive for structural use (and beryllium is very toxic).[31]Aluminium is not as strong or stiff as steel, but the low density makes up for this in theaerospaceindustry and for many other applications where light weight and relatively high strength are crucial.[32]
Pure aluminium is quite soft and lacking instrength. In most applications, variousaluminium alloysare used instead because of their higher strength andhardness.[33]Theyield strengthof pure aluminium is 7–11MPa, whilealuminium alloyshave yield strengths ranging from 200 MPa to 600 MPa.[34]Aluminium isductile, with a percent elongation of 50–70%,[35]andmalleableallowing it to be easilydrawnandextruded;[36]it is also easilymachinedandcast.[36]
Aluminium is an excellentthermalandelectrical conductor, and the amount of aluminium required to match the same amperage incopperweighs only half as much.[37]Aluminium is capable ofsuperconductivity, with a superconducting critical temperature of 1.2kelvinand acritical magnetic fieldof about 100gauss(10milliteslas).[38]It isparamagneticand thus essentially unaffected by static magnetic fields.[39]However, the high electrical conductivity means that it is strongly affected by alternating magnetic fields through the induction ofeddy currents.[40]

## Chemistry
Aluminium combines characteristics of pre- andpost-transition metals. Since it has few available electrons for metallic bonding, like the heaviergroup 13elements, it has the characteristic physical properties of a post-transition metal, with longer-than-expected interatomic distances.[24]Furthermore, as Al3+is a small and highly chargedcation, it is strongly polarizing, andbondingin aluminium compounds tends towardscovalency;[41]this behavior is similar to that ofberyllium(Be2+), displaying an example of adiagonal relationship.[42]
The underlying core of electrons under aluminium'svalence shellis that of the precedingnoble gas, whereas those of the heavier group 13 elementsgallium,indium,thallium, andnihoniumalso include a filled d-subshell and in some cases a filled f-subshell. Hence, the inner electrons of aluminium shield the valence electrons almost completely, unlike those of the heavier group 13 elements. As such, aluminium is the most electropositive metal in its group, and itshydroxideis in fact more basic thanthat of gallium.[41][e]Aluminium also bears minor similarities toboron(ametalloid), which is in the same group: AlX3compounds are valenceisoelectronicto BX3compounds (they have the same valence electronic structure), and both behave asLewis acidsand readily formadducts.[43]Additionally, one of the main motifs of boron chemistry isregular icosahedralstructures, and aluminium forms an important part of many icosahedralquasicrystalalloys, including the Al–Zn–Mg class.[44]
Aluminium has a highchemical affinityto oxygen, which renders it suitable for use as areducing agentin thethermitereaction. A fine powder of aluminium reacts explosively on contact withliquid oxygen; under normal conditions, however, aluminium forms a thin oxide layer (~5 nm at room temperature)[45]that protects the metal from further corrosion by oxygen, water, or diluteacid, a process termedpassivation.[41][46]Aluminium is not attacked byoxidizingacids because of its passivation. This allows aluminium to be used to store reagents such asnitric acid, concentratedsulfuric acid, and some organic acids.[47]
In hot, concentratedhydrochloric acid, aluminium reacts with water through evolution ofhydrogen, and it reacts in aqueoussodiumorpotassium hydroxideat room temperature to formaluminates; protective passivation under these conditions is negligible.[48]Aqua regiaalso dissolves aluminium.[47]Aluminium is also corroded by dissolvedchlorides,[49]such as commonsodium chloride. The oxide layer on aluminium is also destroyed by contact withmercurydue toamalgamationor by contact with salts of some electropositive metals.[41]As such, the strongest aluminium alloys are less corrosion-resistant due togalvanicreactions with alloyedcopper,[50]and aluminium's corrosion resistance is greatly reduced by aqueous salts, particularly in the presence of dissimilar metals.[24]
Aluminium reacts with most nonmetals upon heating, forming compounds such asaluminium nitride(AlN),aluminium sulfide(Al2S3), and thealuminium halides(AlX3). It also forms a wide range ofintermetallic compoundsinvolving metals from every group on the periodic table.[41]

## Inorganic compounds
The vast majority of aluminium compounds, including all aluminium-containingmineralsand all commercially significant aluminium compounds, feature aluminium in the oxidation state 3+. Thecoordination numberof such compounds varies, but generally Al3+is either six- or four-coordinate. Almost all compounds of aluminium(III) are colorless.[41]
In aqueous solution, Al3+exists as the hexa-aqua cation [Al(H2O)6]3+, which has an approximateKaof 10−5.[15]Such solutions are acidic because this cation can act as a proton donor and progressivelyhydrolyzeuntil aprecipitateof aluminium hydroxide, Al(OH)3, forms. This is useful forclarificationof water, since the precipitatenucleatesonsuspendedparticles in the water, henceremoving them. Increasing the pH even further leads to the hydroxide dissolving again asaluminate, [Al(H2O)2(OH)4]−, is formed.
Aluminium hydroxide forms both salts and aluminates and dissolves in acid andalkali, as well as on fusion withacidic and basicoxides.[41]This behavior of Al(OH)3is termedamphoterismand is characteristic of weakly basic cations that form insoluble hydroxides and whose hydrated species can also donate their protons. One effect of this is thataluminium saltswith weak acids are hydrolyzed in water to the aquated hydroxide and the corresponding nonmetal hydride: for example,aluminium sulfideyieldshydrogen sulfide. However, some salts likealuminium carbonateexist in aqueous solution but are unstable as such. Only incomplete hydrolysis takes place for salts with strong acids, such as the halides,nitrate, andsulfate. For similar reasons, anhydrous aluminium salts cannot be made by heating their "hydrates": hydrated aluminium chloride is in fact not AlCl3·6H2O but [Al(H2O)6]Cl3, and the Al–O bonds are so strong that heating is not sufficient to break them and form Al–Cl bonds. This reaction is observed instead:[41]
All fourtrihalidesare well known. Unlike the structures of the three heavier trihalides,aluminium fluoride(AlF3) features six-coordinate aluminium, which explains its involatility and insolubility as well as highheat of formation. Each aluminium atom is surrounded by six fluorine atoms in a distortedoctahedralarrangement, with each fluorine atom being shared between the corners of two octahedra. Such {AlF6} units also exist in complex fluorides such ascryolite, Na3AlF6.[f]AlF3melts at 1,290 °C (2,354 °F) and is made by reaction ofaluminium oxidewithhydrogen fluoridegas at 700 °C (1,300 °F).[52]
With heavier halides, the coordination numbers are lower. The other trihalides aredimericorpolymericwith tetrahedral four-coordinate aluminium centers.[g]Aluminium trichloride(AlCl3) has a layered polymeric structure below its melting point of 192.4 °C (378 °F) but transforms on melting to Al2Cl6dimers. At higher temperatures those increasingly dissociate into trigonal planar AlCl3monomers similar to the structure ofBCl3.Aluminium tribromideandaluminium triiodideform Al2X6dimers in all three phases and hence do not show such significant changes of properties upon phase change.[52]These materials are prepared by treating aluminium with the halogen. The aluminium trihalides form manyaddition compoundsor complexes. TheirLewis acidicnature makes them useful ascatalystsfor theFriedel–Crafts reactions. Aluminium trichloride has major industrial uses involving this reaction, such as in the manufacture ofanthraquinonesandstyrene. Aluminium trichloride is also often used as the precursor for many other aluminium compounds and as a reagent for converting nonmetal fluorides into the corresponding chlorides (atranshalogenation reaction).[52]
Aluminium forms one stable oxide with thechemical formulaAl2O3, commonly calledalumina.[53]It can be found in nature in the mineralcorundum, the α-alumina phase.[54]There is also a γ-alumina phase.[15]Its crystalline form, corundum, is very hard (Mohs hardness9), has a high melting point of 2,045 °C (3,713 °F), has very low volatility, is chemically inert, and is a good electrical insulator. It is often used inabrasives(such assandpaper) as a refractory material and inceramics. It is also the starting material for the electrolytic production of aluminium.Sapphireandrubyare impure corundum contaminated with trace amounts of other metals.[15]
The two main oxide-hydroxides, AlO(OH), areboehmiteanddiaspore. There are three main trihydroxides:bayerite,gibbsite, andnordstrandite, which differ in their crystalline structure (polymorphs). Many other intermediate and related structures are also known.[15]Most of these Al-O-OH systems are produced from ores by a variety of wet processes using acid and bases. Heating the hydroxides leads to the formation of corundum. These materials are of central importance to the production of aluminium and are themselves extremely useful. Some mixed oxide phases are also very useful, such asspinel(MgAl2O4), Na-β-alumina (NaAl11O17), andtricalcium aluminate(Ca3Al2O6), an important mineral phase inPortland cement.[15]
The only stablechalcogenidesunder normal conditions arealuminium sulfide(Al2S3),selenide(Al2Se3), andtelluride(Al2Te3). All three are prepared by direct reaction of their elements at about 1,000 °C (1,800 °F) and quickly hydrolyze completely in water to yield aluminium hydroxide and the respectivehydrogen chalcogenide. As aluminium is a small atom relative to these chalcogens, these have four-coordinate tetrahedral aluminium with various polymorphs having structures related towurtzite, with two-thirds of the possible metal sites occupied either in an orderly (α) or random (β) fashion. The sulfide also has a γ form related to γ-alumina and an unusual high-temperature hexagonal form where half the aluminium atoms have tetrahedral four-coordination and the other half have trigonal bipyramidal five-coordination.[55]
Fourpnictides–aluminium nitride(AlN),aluminium phosphide(AlP),aluminium arsenide(AlAs), andaluminium antimonide(AlSb) – are known. They are allIII-V semiconductorsisoelectronic tosiliconandgermanium, all of which but AlN have thezinc blendestructure. All four can be made by high-temperature (and possibly high-pressure) direct reaction of their component elements.[55]
Aluminium alloys well with most other metals (with the exception of mostalkali metalsand group 13 metals) and over 150intermetallicswith other metals are known. Preparation involves heating fixed metals together in certain proportions, followed by gradual cooling andannealing. Bonding in them is predominantlymetallicand the crystal structure primarily depends on efficiency of packing.[56]
There are few compounds with lower oxidation states. Some arealuminium(I)compounds: AlF, AlCl, AlBr, and AlI all exist in the gaseous phase when the respective trihalide is heated with aluminium, and at cryogenic temperatures.[52]A stable derivative of aluminium monoiodide is the cyclicadductformed withtriethylamine, Al4I4(NEt3)4. Al2O and Al2S also exist but are very unstable.[57]Very simple aluminium(II) compounds are invoked or observed in the reactions of Al metal with oxidants. For example,aluminium monoxide, AlO, has been detected in the gas phase after explosion[58]and in stellar absorption spectra.[59]More thoroughly investigated are compounds of the formula R4Al2which contain an Al–Al bond and where R is a large organicligand.[60]

## Organoaluminium compounds and related hydrides
A variety of compounds of empirical formula AlR3and AlR1.5Cl1.5exist.[61]The aluminiumtrialkylsandtriarylsare either reactive, volatile, and colorless liquids or low-melting solids. They catch fire spontaneously in air and react with water, thus necessitating precautions when handling them. They often form dimers, unlike their boron analogues, but this tendency diminishes for branched-chain alkyls (e.g.Pri,Bui, Me3CCH2). For example,triisobutylaluminiumexists as an equilibrium mixture of the monomer and dimer.[62][63]These dimers, such astrimethylaluminium(Al2Me6), usually feature tetrahedral Al centers formed by dimerization with some alkyl group bridging between both aluminium atoms. They arehard acidsand react readily with ligands, forming adducts. In industry, they are mostly used in alkene insertion reactions, as discovered byKarl Ziegler, most importantly in "growth reactions" that form long-chain unbranched primary alkenes and alcohols, and in the low-pressure polymerization ofetheneandpropene. There are also someheterocyclicandclusterorganoaluminium compounds involving Al–N bonds.[62]
The industrially most important aluminium hydride islithium aluminium hydride(LiAlH4), which is used as a reducing agent inorganic chemistry. It can be produced fromlithium hydrideandaluminium trichloride.[64]The simplest hydride,aluminium hydrideor alane, is not as important. It is a polymer with the formula (AlH3)n, which is in contrast to the correspondingboron hydridethat is a dimer with the formula (BH3)2.[64]

## Space
Aluminium's per-particleabundancein theSolar Systemis 3.15ppm(parts per million).[65][h]It is the twelfth most abundant of all elements and third most abundant among the elements that have odd atomic numbers, after hydrogen andnitrogen.[65]The only stable isotope of aluminium,27Al, is the eighteenth most abundant nucleus in theuniverse. It is created almost entirely after fusion of carbon in massive stars that will later becomeType II supernovas: this fusion creates26Mg, which upon capturing free protons and neutrons, becomes aluminium. Some smaller quantities of27Al are created inhydrogen burningshells of evolved stars, where26Mg can capture free protons.[66]Essentially all aluminium now in existence is27Al.26Al was present in the early Solar System with abundance of 0.005% relative to27Al but its half-life of 728,000 years is too short for any original nuclei to survive;26Al is thereforeextinct.[66]Unlike for27Al, hydrogen burning is the primary source of26Al, with the nuclide emerging after a nucleus of25Mg catches a free proton. However, thetrace quantitiesof26Al that do exist are the most commongamma rayemitter in theinterstellar gas;[66]if the original26Al were still present,gamma ray mapsof the Milky Way would be brighter.[66]

## Earth
Overall, the Earth is about 1.59% aluminium by mass (seventh in abundance by mass).[67]Aluminium occurs in greater proportion in the Earth's crust than in the universe at large. This is because aluminium easily forms the oxide and becomes bound into rocks and stays in theEarth's crust, while less reactive metals sink to the core.[66]In the Earth's crust, aluminium is the most abundant metallic element (8.23% by mass[68]) and the third most abundant of all elements (after oxygen and silicon).[69]A large number of silicates in the Earth's crust contain aluminium.[70]In contrast, the Earth'smantleis only 2.38% aluminium by mass.[71]Aluminium also occurs in seawater at a concentration of 0.41 μg/kg.[72]
Because of its strong affinity for oxygen, aluminium is almost never found in the elemental state; instead it is found in oxides or silicates.Feldspars, the most common group of minerals in the Earth's crust, are aluminosilicates. Aluminium also occurs in the mineralsberyl,cryolite,garnet,spinel, andturquoise.[73]Impurities in alumina yieldgemstones: for example,chromiumyieldsrubyandironyieldssapphire.[74]Native aluminiummetal is extremely rare and can only be found as a minor phase in low oxygenfugacityenvironments, such as the interiors of certain volcanoes.[75]Native aluminium has been reported incold seepsin the northeasterncontinental slopeof theSouth China Sea. It is possible that these deposits resulted frombacterialreductionof tetrahydroxoaluminate Al(OH)4−.[76]
Although aluminium is a common and widespread element, not all aluminium minerals are economically viable sources of the metal. Almost all metallic aluminium is produced from theorebauxite(AlOx(OH)3–2x). Bauxite occurs as aweatheringproduct of low iron and silica bedrock in tropical climatic conditions.[77]In 2017, most bauxite was mined inAustralia,China,Guinea, andIndia.[78]

## History
The history of aluminium has been shaped by usage ofalum. The first written record of alum, made byGreekhistorianHerodotus, dates back to the 5th century BCE.[79]The ancients are known to have used alum as a dyeingmordantand for city defense as a fire-resistant coating for wood.[80]After theCrusades, alum, an indispensable good in the European fabric industry,[81]was a subject of international commerce;[82]it was imported to Europe from the eastern Mediterranean until the mid-15th century.[83]
The nature of alum remained unknown until Swiss physicianParacelsussuggested alum was a salt of an earth of alum around 1530.[84]German doctor and chemistAndreas Libaviusexperimentally confirmed this in 1595.[85]German chemistFriedrich Hoffmannannounced his belief that the base of alum was a distinct earth in 1722.[86]German chemistAndreas Sigismund Marggrafsynthesized alumina in 1754 by boiling clay in sulfuric acid and subsequently addingpotash.[86]
Attempts to produce aluminium date back to 1760.[87]The first successful attempt, however, was completed in 1824 by Danish physicist and chemistHans Christian Ørsted. He reacted anhydrousaluminium chloridewith potassiumamalgam, yielding a lump of metal looking similar to tin.[88][89][90]He presented his results and demonstrated a sample of the new metal in 1825.[91][92]In 1827, German chemistFriedrich Wöhlerrepeated Ørsted's experiments but did not identify any aluminium.[93](The reason for this inconsistency was only discovered in 1921.)[94]He conducted a similar experiment in the same year by mixing anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium (theWöhler process) and produced a powder of aluminium.[90]In 1845, he was able to produce small pieces of the metal and described some physical properties of this metal.[94]For many years thereafter, Wöhler was credited as the discoverer of aluminium.[95]
As Wöhler's method could not yield great quantities of aluminium, the metal remained rare; its cost exceeded that of gold.[93]The first industrial production of aluminium was established in 1856 by French chemistHenri Etienne Sainte-Claire Devilleand companions.[96]Deville had discovered that aluminium trichloride could be reduced bysodium, which was more convenient and less expensive than potassium, which Wöhler had used.[97]Even then, aluminium was still not of great purity and produced aluminium differed in properties by sample.[98]Because of its electricity-conducting capacity, aluminium was used as the cap of theWashington Monument, completed in 1885, the tallest building in the world at the time. The non-corroding metal cap was intended to serve as alightning rodpeak.
The first industrial large-scale production method was independently developed in 1886 by French engineerPaul Héroultand American engineerCharles Martin Hall; it is now known as theHall–Héroult process.[99]The Hall–Héroult process converts alumina into metal. Austrian chemistCarl Joseph Bayerdiscovered a way of purifying bauxite to yield alumina, now known as theBayer process, in 1889.[100]Modern production of aluminium is based on the Bayer and Hall–Héroult processes.[101]
As large-scale production caused aluminium prices to drop, the metal became widely used in jewelry, eyeglass frames, optical instruments, tableware, andfoil, and other everyday items in the 1890s and early 20th century. Aluminium's ability to form hard yet light alloys with other metals provided the metal with many uses at the time.[102]DuringWorld War I, major governments demanded large shipments of aluminium for light strong airframes;[103]duringWorld War II, demand by major governments for aviation was even higher.[104][105][106]
From the early 20th century to 1980, the aluminium industry was characterized bycartelization, as aluminium firms colluded to keep prices high and stable.[107]The first aluminium cartel, the Aluminium Association, was founded in 1901 by thePittsburgh Reduction Company(renamed Alcoa in 1907) andAluminium Industrie AG.[108]TheBritish Aluminium Company, Produits Chimiques d'Alais et de la Camargue, and Société Electro-Métallurgique de Froges also joined the cartel.[108]
By the mid-20th century, aluminium had become a part of everyday life and an essential component of housewares.[109]In 1954, production of aluminium surpassed that ofcopper,[i]historically second in production only to iron,[112]making it the most producednon-ferrous metal. During the mid-20th century, aluminium emerged as a civil engineering material, with building applications in both basic construction and interior finish work,[113]and increasingly being used in military engineering, for both airplanes and armored vehicle engines.[114]Earth's first artificial satellite, launched in 1957, consisted of two separate aluminium semi-spheres joined and all subsequent space vehicles have used aluminium to some extent.[101]Thealuminium canwas invented in 1956 and employed as a storage for drinks in 1958.[115]
Throughout the 20th century, the production of aluminium rose rapidly: while the world production of aluminium in 1900 was 6,800 metric tons, the annual production first exceeded 100,000 metric tons in 1916; 1,000,000 tons in 1941; 10,000,000 tons in 1971.[110]In the 1970s, the increased demand for aluminium made it an exchange commodity; it entered theLondon Metal Exchange, the oldest industrial metal exchange in the world, in 1978.[101]The output continued to grow: the annual production of aluminium exceeded 50,000,000 metric tons in 2013.[110]
Thereal pricefor aluminium declined from $14,000 per metric ton in 1900 to $2,340 in 1948 (in 1998 United States dollars).[110]Extraction and processing costs were lowered over technological progress and the scale of the economies. However, the need to exploit lower-grade poorer quality deposits and the use of fast increasing input costs (above all, energy) increased the net cost of aluminium;[116]the real price began to grow in the 1970s with the rise of energy cost.[117]Production moved from theindustrialized countriesto countries where production was cheaper.[118]Production costs in the late 20th century changed because of advances in technology, lower energy prices, exchange rates of the United States dollar, and alumina prices.[119]TheBRICcountries' combined share in primary production and primary consumption grew substantially in the first decade of the 21st century.[120]China is accumulating an especially large share of the world's production thanks to an abundance of resources, cheap energy, and governmental stimuli;[121]it also increased its consumption share from 2% in 1972 to 40% in 2010.[122]In the United States, Western Europe, and Japan, most aluminium was consumed in transportation, engineering, construction, and packaging.[123]In 2021, prices for industrial metals such as aluminium have soared to near-record levels asenergy shortagesin China drive up costs for electricity.[124]

## Etymology
The namesaluminiumandaluminumare derived from the wordalumine, an obsolete term foralumina,[j]the primary naturally occurringoxide of aluminium.[126]Aluminewas borrowed from French, which in turn derived it fromalumen, the classical Latin name foralum, the mineral from which it was collected.[127]The Latin wordalumenstems from theProto-Indo-Europeanroot*alu-meaning "bitter" or "beer".[128]The English namealumdoes not come directly from Latin, whereasalumine/aluminacomes from the Latin wordalumen(ondeclension,alumenchanges toalumin-).

## Early proposals (1808–1812)
British chemistHumphry Davy, who performed a number of experiments aimed to isolate the metal, is credited as the person who named the element. The first name proposed for the metal to be isolated from alum wasalumium, which Davy suggested in an 1808 article on his electrochemical research, published inPhilosophical Transactions of the Royal Society.[129]It appeared that the name was created from the English wordalumand the Latin suffix-ium; but it was customary then to give elements names originating in Latin, so this name was not adopted universally.
The namealumiumwas criticized by contemporary chemists from France, Germany, and Sweden, who insisted the metal should be named for the oxide, alumina, from which it would be isolated.[130]One example wasEssai sur la Nomenclature chimique(July 1811), written in French by a Swedish chemist,Jöns Jacob Berzelius, in which the namealuminiumis given to the element that would be synthesized from alum.[131][k](Another article in the same journal issue also refers to the metal whose oxide is the basis ofsapphire, i.e., the same metal, as toaluminium.)[133]A January 1811 summary of one of Davy's lectures at theRoyal Societymentioned the namealuminiumas a possibility.[134]
In 1812, Davy published his chemistry textElements of Chemical Philosophyin which he used the spellingaluminum.[135]

## 19th-century spelling and usage
In 1812, British scientistThomas Young[136]wrote an anonymous review of Davy's book, in which he proposed the namealuminiuminstead ofaluminum, which he thought had a "less classical sound".[137]This name persisted: although the-umspelling was occasionally used in Britain, the American scientific language used-iumfrom the start.[138]
The French have used the spellingaluminiumfrom the start.[139]However, in England and Germany Davy's spellingaluminumwas initially used; until Wöhler published his account of the Wöhler process in 1827 in which he used the spellingAluminium,[l]which caused that spelling's largely wholesale adoption in England and Germany, with the exception of a small number of what Richards characterized as "patriotic" English chemists that were "averse to foreign innovations" who occasionally still usedaluminum.[139]
Most scientists throughout the world used-iumin the 19th century;[140]and it was entrenched in several other European languages, such asFrench,German, andDutch.[m]
In 1828, an American lexicographer,Noah Webster, entered only thealuminumspelling in hisAmerican Dictionary of the English Language.[141]In the 1830s, the-umspelling gained usage in the United States; by the 1860s, it had become the more common spelling there outside science.[138]In 1892, Hall used the-umspelling in his advertising handbill for his new electrolytic method of producing the metal, despite his constant use of the-iumspelling in all the patents he filed between 1886 and 1903. It is unknown whether this spelling was introduced by mistake or intentionally, but Hall preferredaluminumsince its introduction because it resembledplatinum, the name of a prestigious metal.[142]By 1890, both spellings had been common in the United States, the-iumspelling being slightly more common; by 1895, the situation had reversed; by 1900,aluminumhad become twice as common asaluminium; in the next decade, the-umspelling dominated American usage.

## 20th-century standardization and regional usage
In 1925, theAmerican Chemical Societyadopted the spellingaluminum.[140]
TheInternational Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry(IUPAC) adoptedaluminiumas the standard international name for the element in 1990.[143]In 1993, they recognizedaluminumas an acceptable variant;[143]the most recent2005 edition of the IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistryalso acknowledges this spelling.[144]IUPAC official publications use the-iumspelling as primary, and they list both where it is appropriate.[n]
Both spellings have coexisted since. Their usage is currently regional:aluminumdominates in the United States andCanada;aluminiumis prevalent in the rest of the English-speaking world.[140]

## Other proposed names
German physicistLudwig Wilhelm Gilberthad proposedThonerde-metall, after the GermanThonerde[o]for alumina, in hisAnnalen der Physikbut that name never caught on at all even in Germany.[139]American chemistJoseph W. Richards[p]in 1891 found just one occurrence ofargilliumin Swedish, from the Frenchargille[q]for clay.[139]

## Production and refinement
The production of aluminium starts with the extraction ofbauxiterock from the ground. The bauxite is processed and transformed using theBayer processintoalumina, which is then processed using theHall–Héroult process, resulting in the final aluminium.
Aluminium production is highly energy-consuming, and so the producers tend to locate smelters in places where electric power is both plentiful and inexpensive.[147]Production of one kilogram of aluminium requires 7 kilograms of oil energy equivalent, as compared to 1.5 kilograms for steel and 2 kilograms for plastic.[148]As of 2024, the world's largest producers of aluminium were China, India,Russia, Canada, and theUnited Arab Emirates,[146]while China is by far the top producer of aluminium with a world share of over 55%.
According to theInternational Resource Panel'sMetal Stocks in Society report, the globalper capitastock of aluminium in use in society (i.e. in cars, buildings, electronics, etc.) is 80 kg (180 lb). Much of this is in more-developed countries (350–500 kg (770–1,100 lb) per capita) rather than less-developed countries (35 kg (77 lb) per capita).[149]

## Bayer process
Bauxiteis converted to alumina by the Bayer process. Bauxite is blended for uniform composition and then is ground fine. The resultingslurryis mixed with a hot solution ofsodium hydroxide; the mixture is then treated in a digester vessel at a pressure well above atmospheric, dissolving the aluminium hydroxide in bauxite while converting impurities into relatively insoluble compounds:[150]
After this reaction, the slurry is at a temperature above its atmospheric boiling point. It is cooled by removing steam as pressure is reduced. The bauxite residue is separated from the solution and discarded. The solution, free of solids, isseededwith small crystals of aluminium hydroxide; this causes decomposition of the [Al(OH)4]−ions to aluminium hydroxide. After about half of aluminium has precipitated, the mixture is sent to classifiers. Small crystals of aluminium hydroxide are collected to serve as seeding agents; coarse particles are converted to alumina by heating; the excess solution is removed by evaporation, (if needed) purified, and recycled.[150]

## Hall–Héroult process
The conversion ofaluminato aluminium is achieved by theHall–Héroult process. In this energy-intensive process, a solution of alumina in a molten (940 and 970 °C (1,720 and 1,780 °F)) mixture ofcryolite(Na3AlF6) withcalcium fluorideiselectrolyzedto produce metallic aluminium. The liquid aluminium sinks to the bottom of the solution and is tapped off, and usually cast into large blocks calledaluminium billetsfor further processing.[47]
Anodesof the electrolysis cell are made of carbon—the most resistant material against fluoride corrosion—and either bake at the process or are prebaked. The former, also called Söderberg anodes, are less power-efficient and fumes released during baking are costly to collect, which is why they are being replaced by prebaked anodes even though they save the power, energy, and labor to prebake thecathodes. Carbon for anodes should be preferably pure so that neither aluminium nor theelectrolyteis contaminated with ash. Despite carbon's resistivity against corrosion, it is still consumed at a rate of 0.4–0.5 kg per each kilogram of produced aluminium. Cathodes are made ofanthracite; high purity for them is not required because impuritiesleachonly very slowly. The cathode is consumed at a rate of 0.02–0.04 kg per each kilogram of produced aluminium. A cell is usually terminated after 2–6 years following a failure of the cathode.[47]
The Hall–Heroult process produces aluminium with a purity of above 99%. Further purification can be done by theHoopes process. This process involves the electrolysis of molten aluminium with a sodium,barium, and aluminium fluoride electrolyte. The resulting aluminium has a purity of 99.99%.[47][151]
Electric power represents about 20 to 40% of the cost of producing aluminium, depending on the location of the smelter. Aluminium production consumes roughly 5% of electricity generated in the United States.[143]Because of this, alternatives to the Hall–Héroult process have been researched, but none has turned out to be economically feasible.[47]

## Recycling
Recovery of the metal throughrecyclinghas become an important task of the aluminium industry. Recycling was a low-profile activity until the late 1960s, when the growing use of aluminiumbeverage cansbrought it to public awareness.[152]Recycling involves melting the scrap, a process that requires only 5% of the energy used to produce aluminium from ore, though a significant part (up to 15% of the input material) is lost asdross(ash-like oxide).[153]An aluminium stack melter produces significantly less dross, with values reported below 1%.[154]
White dross from primary aluminium production and from secondary recycling operations still contains useful quantities of aluminium that can beextracted industrially. The process produces aluminium billets, together with a highly complex waste material. This waste is difficult to manage. It reacts with water, releasing a mixture of gases including, among others,acetylene,[155]hydrogen sulfideand significant amounts ofammonia.[156]Despite these difficulties, the waste is used as a filler inasphaltandconcrete.[157]Its potential for hydrogen production has also been considered and researched.[158][159]

## Metal
The global production of aluminium in 2016 was 58.8 million metric tons.[outdated statistic]It exceeded that of any other metal exceptiron(1,231 million metric tons).[160][161]
Aluminium is almost always alloyed, which markedly improves its mechanical properties, especially whentempered. For example, the commonaluminium foilsand beverage cans are alloys of 92% to 99% aluminium.[162]The mainalloyingagents for both wrought and cast aluminium arecopper,zinc,magnesium,manganese, andsilicon(e.g.,duralumin) with the levels of other metals in a few percent by weight.[163][164]
The major uses for aluminium are in:[165]
Aluminium is the main substitute to copper and its applications to the traditional domains of copper have seen increased interest whencopper pricesare high such as in2011–2014and 2021.[168]There is a competition in the use of aluminium and copper in theautomotive industry, but in other uses such as in theconstruction industryand inundergroundandsubmarinecables aluminium has been largelly unable to compete with copper.[168]

## Compounds
The great majority (about 90%) ofaluminium oxideis converted to metallic aluminium.[150]Being a very hard material (Mohs hardness9),[169]alumina is widely used as an abrasive;[170]being extraordinarily chemically inert, it is useful in highly reactive environments such ashigh pressure sodiumlamps.[171]Aluminium oxide is commonly used as a catalyst for industrial processes;[150]e.g. theClaus processto converthydrogen sulfideto sulfur inrefineriesand toalkylateamines.[172][173]Many industrialcatalystsaresupportedby alumina, meaning that the expensivecatalystmaterial is dispersed over a surface of the inert alumina.[174]Another principal use is as a drying agent or absorbent.[150][175]
Several sulfates of aluminium have industrial and commercial application.Aluminium sulfate(in its hydrate form) is produced on the annual scale of several millions of metric tons.[176]About two-thirds is consumed inwater treatment.[176]The next major application is in the manufacture of paper.[176]It is also used as a mordant in dyeing, in pickling seeds, deodorizing of mineral oils, inleather tanning, and in production of other aluminium compounds.[176]Two kinds of alum,ammonium alumandpotassium alum, were formerly used as mordants and in leather tanning, but their use has significantly declined following availability of high-purity aluminium sulfate.[176]Anhydrousaluminium chlorideis used as a catalyst in chemical and petrochemical industries, the dyeing industry, and in synthesis of various inorganic and organic compounds.[176]Aluminium hydroxychlorides are used in purifying water, in the paper industry, and asantiperspirants.[176]Sodium aluminateis used in treating water and as an accelerator of solidification of cement.[176]
Many aluminium compounds have niche applications, for example:

## Biology
Despite its widespread occurrence in the Earth's crust, aluminium has no known function in biology.[47]At pH 6–9 (relevant for most natural waters), aluminium precipitates out of water as the hydroxide and is hence not available; most elements behaving this way have no biological role or are toxic.[189]Aluminium sulfatehas anLD50of 6207 mg/kg (oral, mouse).[190]

## Toxicity
Aluminium is classified as a non-carcinogen by theUnited States Department of Health and Human Services.[191][r]A review published in 1988 said that there was little evidence that normal exposure to aluminium presents a risk to healthy adult,[194]and a 2014 multi-element toxicology review was unable to find deleterious effects of aluminium consumed in amounts not greater than 40 mg/day per kg ofbody mass.[191]Most aluminium consumed will leave the body in feces, and any that enters the bloodstream will be excreted via urine.[195]

## Effects
Aluminium, although rarely, can cause vitamin D-resistantosteomalacia,erythropoietin-resistantmicrocytic anemia, and central nervous system alterations. People with kidney insufficiency are especially at a risk.[191]Chronic ingestion of hydrated aluminium silicates (for excess gastric acidity control) may result in aluminium binding to intestinal contents and increased elimination of other metals, such asironorzinc; sufficiently high doses (>50 g/day) can cause anemia.[191]
During the 1988Camelford water pollution incident, people inCamelfordhad their drinking water contaminated withaluminium sulfatefor several weeks. A final report into the incident in 2013 concluded it was unlikely that this had caused long-term health problems.[196]
Aluminium has been suspected of being a possible cause ofAlzheimer's disease,[197]but research into this for over 40 years has found, as of 2018[update], no good evidence of causal effect.[198][199]
Aluminium increasesestrogen-relatedgene expressionin humanbreast cancercells cultured in the laboratory.[200]In very high doses, aluminium is associated with altered function of the blood–brain barrier.[201]A small percentage of people[202]have contactallergiesto aluminium and experience itchy red rashes, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, poor memory, insomnia, depression, asthma, irritable bowel syndrome, or other symptoms upon contact with products containing aluminium.[203]
Exposure to powdered aluminium or aluminium welding fumes can causepulmonary fibrosis.[204]Fine aluminium powder can ignite or explode, posing another workplace hazard.[205][206]

## Exposure routes
Food is the main source of aluminium. Drinking water contains more aluminium than solid food;[191]however, aluminium in food may be absorbed more than aluminium from water.[207]Major sources of human oral exposure to aluminium include food (due to its use in food additives, food and beverage packaging, and cooking utensils), drinking water (due to its use in municipal water treatment), and aluminium-containing medications (particularly antacid/antiulcer and buffered aspirin formulations).[208]Dietary exposure in Europeans averages to 0.2–1.5 mg/kg/week but can be as high as 2.3 mg/kg/week.[191]Higher exposure levels of aluminium are mostly limited toplumbers,masons, electrical workers, machinists, andsurgeons.[209]
Consumption ofantacids, antiperspirants,vaccines, and cosmetics provide possible routes of exposure.[210]Consumption of acidic foods or liquids with aluminium enhances aluminium absorption,[211]andmaltolhas been shown to increase the accumulation of aluminium in nerve and bone tissues.[212]

## Treatment
In case of suspected sudden intake of a large amount of aluminium, the only treatment isdeferoxamine mesylatewhich may be given to help eliminate aluminium from the body bychelation therapy.[213][214]However, this should be applied with caution as this reduces not only aluminium body levels, but also those of other metals such as copper or iron.[213]

## Environmental effects
High levels of aluminium occur near mining sites; small amounts of aluminium are released to the environment atcoal-fired power plantsorincinerators.[195]Aluminium in the air is washed out by the rain or normally settles down but small particles of aluminium remain in the air for a long time.[195]
Acidicprecipitationis the main natural factor to mobilize aluminium from natural sources[191]and the main reason for the environmental effects of aluminium;[215]however, the main factor of presence of aluminium in salt and freshwater are the industrial processes that also release aluminium into air.[191]
In water, aluminium acts as a toxic agent ongill-breathing animals such asfishwhen the water is acidic, in which aluminium may precipitate on gills,[216]which causes loss ofplasma- andhemolymphions leading toosmoregulatoryfailure.[215]Organic complexes of aluminium may be easily absorbed and interfere withmetabolismin mammals and birds, even though this rarely happens in practice.[215]
Aluminium is primary among the factors that reduce plant growth on acidic soils. Although it is generally harmless to plant growth in pH-neutral soils, in acid soils the concentration of toxic Al3+cations increases and disturbs root growth and function.[217][218][219][220]Wheathasdevelopeda tolerance to aluminium, releasingorganic compoundsthat bind to harmful aluminiumcations.Sorghumis believed to have the same tolerance mechanism.[221]
Aluminium production possesses its own challenges to the environment on each step of the production process. The major challenge is theemission of greenhouse gases. These gases result from electrical consumption of the smelters and the byproducts of processing.[222]The most potent of these gases areperfluorocarbons, namely CF4and C2F6, from the smelting process.[223]
Biodegradation of metallic aluminium is extremely rare; most aluminium-corroding organisms do not directly attack or consume the aluminium, but instead produce corrosive wastes.[224][225]The fungusGeotrichum candidumcan consume the aluminium incompact discs.[226][227][228]The bacteriumPseudomonas aeruginosaand the fungusCladosporium resinaeare commonly detected in aircraft fuel tanks that usekerosene-based fuels (notavgas), and laboratory cultures can degrade aluminium.[229]

## References
The French chemists have given a new name to this pure earth; alumine in French, and alumina in Latin. I confess I do not like this alumina.
Origin:Formed within English, by derivation.Etymons:aluminen.,-iumsuffix,aluminumn.
Etymology:< Frenchalumine(L. B. Guyton de Morveau 1782,Observ. sur la Physique19378) < classical Latinalūmin-,alūmenalumn.1, after French-ine-inesuffix4.
Potassium, acting upon alumine and glucine, produces pyrophoric substances of a dark grey colour, which burnt, throwing off brilliant sparks, and leaving behind alkali and earth, and which, when thrown into water, decomposed it with great violence. The result of this experiment is not wholly decisive as to the existence of what might be calledaluminiumandglucinium
aluminiumn.coexisted with its synonymaluminumn.throughout the 19th cent. From the beginning of the 20th cent.,aluminumgradually became the predominant form in North America; it was adopted as the official name of the metal in the United States by the American Chemical Society in 1925. Elsewhere,aluminumwas gradually superseded byaluminium, which was accepted as international standard by IUPAC in 1990.