## Animation
Animationis afilmmakingtechnique wherebypicturesare created or manipulated and then played in sequence to create the illusion ofmoving images. Intraditional animation, images are drawn or painted by hand ontransparent celluloid sheetsto bephotographedand exhibited onfilm. Animation has been recognized as an artistic medium, specifically within theentertainment industry. Many animations are either traditional animations orcomputer animationsmade withcomputer-generated imagery(CGI).Stop motion animation, in particularclaymation, is also prominent alongside these other forms, albeit to a lesser degree.
Animation is contrasted withlive action, although the two do not exist in isolation. Many filmmakers have producedfilms that are a hybrid of the two. As CGI increasinglyapproximates photographic imagery, filmmakers can relatively easilycomposite3D animatedvisual effects(VFX) into their film, rather than usingpractical effects.

## General overview
Computer animationcan be very detailed3D animation, while 2D computer animation (which may have the look of traditional animation) can be used for stylistic reasons, low bandwidth, or fasterreal-time renderings. Other common animation methods apply astop motiontechnique to two- and three-dimensional objects likepaper cutouts,puppets, orclay figures.
Ananimated cartoon, or simply acartoon, is an animated film, usually short, that features an exaggeratedstyle. This style is often inspired by comic strips, gag cartoons, and other non-animated art forms. Cartoons frequently include anthropomorphic animals,superheroes, or the adventures of human protagonists. The action often revolves around exaggeratedphysical humor, particularly in predator/prey dynamics (e.g. cats and mice, coyotes and birds), where violent pratfalls such as falls, collisions, and explosions occur, often in ways that would be lethal in the real life.
During the late 1980s, the term "cartoon" was shortened totoon, referring to characters in animated productions, or more specifically, cartoonishly-drawn characters. This term gained popularity first in 1988 with the live-action/animated hybrid filmWho Framed Roger Rabbit, which introduced ToonTown, a world inhabited by various animated cartoon characters. In 1990,Tiny Toon Adventuresembraced the classic cartoon spirit, introducing a new generation of cartoon characters. Then, in 1993,Animaniacsfollowed, featuring the threerubber-hose-styled Warner siblings, Yakko Warner, Wakko Warner, and Dot Warner, who are trapped in the 1930s, eventually escaped and found themselves in theWarner Bros. water towerin the 1990s.
The illusion of animation—as in motion pictures in general—has traditionally been attributed to thepersistence of visionand later to thephi phenomenonandbeta movement, but the exact neurological causes are still uncertain. The illusion of motion caused by a rapid succession of images that minimally differ from each other, with unnoticeable interruptions, is astroboscopic effect. Whileanimatorstraditionally used to draw each part of the movements and changes of figures on transparent cels that could be moved over a separate background, computer animation is usually based on programming paths betweenkey framesto maneuver digitally created figures throughout a digitally created environment.
Analogmechanical animation media that rely on the rapid display of sequential images include thephenakistiscope,zoetrope,flip book,praxinoscope, and film.Televisionandvideoare popular electronic animation media that originally were analog and now operatedigitally. For display on computers, technology such as theanimated GIFandFlash animationwere developed.
In addition toshort films,feature films,television series, animated GIFs, and other media dedicated to the display of moving images, animation is also prevalent invideo games,motion graphics,user interfaces, andvisual effects.[1]
The physical movement of image parts through simple mechanics—for instance, moving images inmagic lanternshows—can also be considered animation. The mechanical manipulation of three-dimensional puppets and objects to emulate living beings has a very long history inautomata. Electronic automata were popularized byDisneyasanimatronics.

## Etymology
The wordanimationcomes to the Latin wordanimātiō, meaning 'bestowing of life'.[2]The earlier meaning of the English word is 'liveliness' and has been in use much longer than the meaning of 'moving image medium'.

## Before cinematography
Long before modern animation began, audiences around the world were captivated by the magic of moving characters. For centuries, master artists and craftsmen have brought puppets,automatons,shadow puppets, and fantasticallanternsto life, inspiring the imagination through physically manipulated wonders.[3]
In 1833, thestroboscopicdisc (better known as thephenakistiscope) introduced the principle of modern animation, which would also be applied in thezoetrope(introduced in 1866), theflip book(1868), thepraxinoscope(1877) andfilm.
The device was operated by spinning the cardboard disc and viewing the reflection of the image in a mirror through a series of moving slits, which created the illusion that the image was moving.[4]

## Silent era
Whencinematographyeventually broke through in the 1890s, the wonder of the realistic details in the new medium was seen as its biggest accomplishment. It took years before animation found its way to the cinemas. The successful shortThe Haunted Hotel(1907) byJ. Stuart Blacktonpopularizedstop motionand reportedly inspiredÉmile Cohlto createFantasmagorie(1908), regarded as the oldest known example of a completetraditional (hand-drawn) animationon standard cinematographic film. Other great artistic and very influential short films were created byLadislas Starevichwith his puppet animations since 1910 and byWinsor McCaywith detailed hand-drawn animation in films such asLittle Nemo(1911) andGertie the Dinosaur(1914).[5]
During the 1910s, the production of animated "cartoons" became an industry in the US.[6]Successful producerJohn Randolph Brayand animatorEarl Hurdpatented thecel animationprocess that dominated the animation industry for the rest of the century.[7][8]Felix the Cat, who debuted in 1919, became the first fully realized anthropomorphic animal character in the history of American animation.[9]

## American golden age
In 1928,Steamboat Willie, featuringMickey MouseandMinnie Mouse, popularized film-with-synchronized-sound and putWalt Disney's studio at the forefront of the animation industry. AlthoughDisney Animation'sactual output relative to total global animation output has always been very small, the studio has overwhelmingly dominated the "aesthetic norms" of animation ever since.[10]
The enormous success of Mickey Mouse is seen as the start of thegolden age of American animationthat would last until the 1960s. The United States dominated the world market of animation with a plethora of cel-animated theatrical shorts.[11]Several studios would introduce characters that would become very popular and would have long-lasting careers, includingWalt Disney Productions'Goofy(1932) andDonald Duck(1934),Fleischer Studios/Paramount Cartoon Studios'Out of the Inkwell'Koko the Clown(1918),BimboandBetty Boop(1930),Popeye(1933) andCasper the Friendly Ghost(1945),Warner Bros. Cartoon Studios'Looney Tunes'Porky Pig(1935),Daffy Duck(1937),Elmer Fudd(1937–1940),Bugs Bunny(1938–1940),Tweety(1942),Sylvester the Cat(1945),Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner(1949),MGM cartoon studio'sTom and Jerry(1940) andDroopy,Universal Cartoon Studios'Woody Woodpecker(1940),Terrytoons/20th Century Fox'sMighty Mouse(1942), andUnited Artists'Pink Panther(1963).

## Features before CGI
In 1917, Italian-Argentine directorQuirino Cristianimade the first feature-length filmEl Apóstol(nowlost), which became a critical and commercial success. It was followed by Cristiani'sSin dejar rastrosin 1918, but one day after its premiere, the film was confiscated by the government.[13]
After working on it for three years,Lotte Reinigerreleased the German feature-lengthsilhouette animationDie Abenteuer des Prinzen Achmedin 1926, the oldest extant animated feature.[14]
In 1937,Walt Disney Studiospremiered their first animated featureSnow White and the Seven Dwarfs, still one of the highest-grossing traditional animation features as of May 2020[update].[15][16]The Fleischer studios followed this example in 1939 withGulliver's Travelswith some success. Partly due to foreign markets being cut off by the Second World War, Disney's next featuresPinocchio,Fantasia(both 1940), Fleischer Studios' second animated featureMr. Bug Goes to Town(1941–1942) failed at the box office. For several decades, Disney was the only American studio to regularly produce animated features, untilRalph Bakshibecame the first to release more than a handful of features.Sullivan-Bluth Studiosbegan to regularly produce animated features starting withAn American Tailin 1986.[17]
Although relatively few titles became as successful as Disney's features, other countries developed their own animation industries that produced both short and feature theatrical animations in a wide variety of styles, relatively often includingstop motionandcutout animationtechniques. SovietSoyuzmultfilmanimation studio, founded in 1936, produced 20 films (including shorts) per year on average and reached 1,582 titles in 2018. China, Czechoslovakia / Czech Republic, Italy, France, and Belgium were other countries that more than occasionally released feature films.

## Television
Animation became very popular on television since the 1950s, when television sets started to become common in most developed countries. Cartoons were mainly programmed for children, on convenient time slots, and especially US youth spent many hours watchingSaturday-morning cartoons. Many classic cartoons found a new life on the small screen and by the end of the 1950s, the production of new animated cartoons started to shift from theatrical releases to TV series.Hanna-Barbera Productionswas especially prolific and had huge hit series, such asThe Flintstones(1960–1966) (the firstprime timeanimated series),Scooby-Doo(since 1969) and Belgian co-productionThe Smurfs(1981–1989). The constraints of American television programming and the demand for an enormous quantity resulted in cheaper and quickerlimited animationmethods and much more formulaic scripts. Quality dwindled until more daring animation surfaced in the late 1980s and in the early 1990s with hit series, the first cartoon ofThe Simpsons(1987), which later developed intoits own show(in 1989) andSpongeBob SquarePants(since 1999) as part of a "renaissance" of American animation.[18]
While US animated series also spawned successes internationally, many other countries produced their own child-oriented programming, relatively often preferringstop motionandpuppetryover cel animation. JapaneseanimeTV series became very successful internationally since the 1960s, and European producers looking for affordable cel animators relatively often started co-productions with Japanese studios, resulting in hit series such asBarbapapa(The Netherlands/Japan/France 1973–1977),Wickie und die starken Männer/小さなバイキング ビッケ (Vicky the Viking)(Austria/Germany/Japan 1974),Maya the Honey Bee(Japan/Germany 1975) andThe Jungle Book(Italy/Japan 1989).[citation needed]

## Switch from cels to computers
Computer animationwas gradually developed since the 1940s. 3D wireframe animation started popping up in the mainstream in the 1970s, with an early (short) appearance in the sci-fi thrillerFutureworld(1976).[19]
The Rescuers Down Underwas the first feature film to be completely created digitally without a camera.[20]It was produced using theComputer Animation Production System(CAPS), developed byPixarin collaboration withThe Walt Disney Companyin the late 1980s, in a style similar to traditional cel animation.[21][22][23]
The so-called 3D style, more often associated with computer animation, became the dominant technique following the success of Pixar'sToy Story(1995), the first computer-animated feature in this style.[24]
Most of the cel animation studios switched to producing mostly computer-animated films around the 1990s, as it proved cheaper and more profitable. Not only the very popular 3D animation style was generated with computers, but also most of the films and series with a more traditional hand-crafted appearance, in which the charming characteristics of cel animation could be emulated with software, while new digital tools helped developing new styles and effects.[25][26][27][28][29][30]

## Economic status
In 2010, the animation market was estimated to be worth circa US$80 billion.[31]By 2021, the value had increased to an estimated US$370 billion.[32]Animated feature-length films returned the highestgross margins(around 52%) of allfilm genresbetween 2004 and 2013.[33]Animation as an art and industry continues to thrive as of the early 2020s.[34][35][36]

## Education, propaganda and commercials
The clarity of animation makes it a powerful tool for instruction, while its total malleability also allows exaggeration that can be employed to convey strong emotions and to thwart reality. It has therefore been widely used for other purposes than mere entertainment.[37]
During World War II, animation was widely exploited for propaganda.Many American studios, including Warner Bros. and Disney, lent their talents and their cartoon characters to convey to the public certain war values. These efforts extended to other countries well into theCold Warera, particularly as it pertained to "combatting" communism. For example, the English1954 adaptationofGeorge Orwell'sAnimal Farm(the nation's first feature-length animated film) is speculated to have had its production funded by the CIA.[38][39]
Animation has been very popular in television commercials, both due to its graphic appeal, and the humour it can provide. Some animated characters in commercials have survived for decades, such asSnap, Crackle and Popin advertisements for Kellogg's cereals.[40]Tex Averywas the producer of the firstRaid"Kills Bugs Dead" commercials in 1966, which were very successful for the company.[41]

## Other media, merchandise and theme parks
Apart from their success in movie theaters and television series, many cartoon characters would also prove lucrative when licensed for all kinds of merchandise and for other media.
Animation has traditionally been very closely related tocomic books. While many comic book characters found their way to the screen (which is often the case in Japan, where manymangaare adapted intoanime), original animated characters also commonly appear in comic books and magazines. Somewhat similarly, characters and plots forvideo games(an interactive form of animation that became its own medium) have been derived from films and vice versa.[42]
While very many animation companies commercially exploit their creations outside moving image media,The Walt Disney Companyis the best known and most extreme example. Since first being licensed for a children's writing tablet in 1929, theirMickey Mousemascot has beendepicted on an enormous amount of products, as have many other Disney characters. This may have influenced somepejorative use of Mickey's name, butlicensed Disney productssell well, and the so-calledDisneyanahas many avid collectors, and even a dedicatedDisneyana Fan Club(since 1984).[43]
Disneylandopened in 1955 and features many attractions that were based on Disney's cartoon characters. Its enormous success spawned several otherDisney theme parks and resorts.Disney's earningsfrom the theme parks have relatively often been higher than those from their movies.

## Awards
As with any other form of media, animation has instituted awards for excellence in the field. Many are part of general or regional film award programs, like the China'sGolden Rooster AwardforBest Animation(since 1981). Awards programs dedicated to animation, with many categories, includeASIFA-Hollywood'sAnnie Awards, theEmile Awardsin Europe and theAnima Mundiawards in Brazil.[44][45][46]

## Academy Awards
Apart fromAcademy AwardsforBest Animated Short Film(since 1932) andBest Animated Feature(since 2002), animated movies have been nominated and rewarded in other categories, relatively often forBest Original SongandBest Original Score.
Beauty and the Beastwas the first animated film nominated forBest Picture, in 1991.Up(2009) andToy Story 3(2010) also received Best Picture nominations, after the academy expanded the number of nominees from five to ten.[47]

## Production
The creation of non-trivial animation works (i.e., longer than a few seconds) has developed as a form offilmmaking, with certain unique aspects.[48]Traits common to both live-action and animatedfeature filmsare labor intensity and high production costs.[49]
The most important difference is that once a film is in the production phase, themarginal costof one more shot is higher for animated films than live-action films.[50]It is relatively easy for a director to ask for one moretakeduringprincipal photographyof a live-action film, but every take on an animated film must be manually rendered by animators (although the task of rendering slightly different takes has been made less tedious by modern computer animation).[51]It is pointless for a studio to pay the salaries of dozens of animators to spend weeks creating a visually dazzling five-minute scene if that scene fails to effectively advance the plot of the film.[52]Thus, animation studios starting with Disney began the practice in the 1930s of maintaining story departments wherestoryboard artistsdevelop every single scene throughstoryboards, then handing the film over to the animators only after the production team is satisfied that all the scenes make sense as a whole.[53]While live-action films are now also storyboarded, they enjoy more latitude to depart from storyboards (i.e., real-time improvisation).[citation needed][54]
Another problem unique to animation is the requirement to maintain a film's consistency from start to finish, even as films have grown longer and teams have grown larger. Animators, like all artists, necessarily have individual styles, but must subordinate their individuality in a consistent way to whatever style is employed on a particular film.[55][56]Since the early 1980s, teams of about 500 to 600 people, of whom 50 to 70 are animators, typically have created feature-length animated films. It is relatively easy for two or three artists to match their styles; synchronizing those of dozens of artists is more difficult.[57]
This problem is usually solved by having a separate group of visual development artists develop an overall look and palette for each film before the animation begins.[55]While animators must "sacrifice their personal drawing styles so that the work of many hands appears to be that of one", visual development artists are allowed to "create new worlds, new characters, and new entertainment possibilities in their own individualistic graphic styles".[55]Character designers on the visual development team drawmodel sheetsto show how each character should look like with different facial expressions, posed in different positions, and viewed from different angles.[58][59]On traditionally animated projects,maquetteswere often sculpted to further help the animators see how characters would look from different angles.[58][60]
Unlike live-action films, animated films were traditionally developed beyond the synopsis stage through the storyboard format; the storyboard artists would then receive credit for writing the film.[61][62]The traditional approach worked for several decades because prior to the 1960s, no one except Disney was attempting to regularly produce feature-length animated films.[62]All other animation studios, with occasional exceptions, were producingshort filmsonly a few minutes in length.[62]For short films, it was enough for the storyboard artists to work up a fewvisual gagsand then string them together to form a crude plot.[62]
In 1960,Hanna-Barberapioneered the longeranimated sitcomformat for television withThe Flintstones.[62]Hanna-Barbera and the other early television animation studios soon discovered that storyboarding was far too inefficient to fill up a half-hour episode on the extremely tight budgets typical of television.[62]During the 1960s, these studios experimented with a more efficient method for developing story material: ascreenwriteris hired to draft a writtenscreenplaywhich is approved and handed over to the storyboard artists for storyboarding.[62]This method creates significant tension between screenwriters and storyboard artists, in that some artists feel that people who cannot draw should not be writing for animation, while some writers feel that artists do not understand how to write.[62]Despite that tension, it has become and remains the dominant method by which animation studios develop both feature-length films and television shows.[62]
Ironically, the Disney studio was relatively slow to adopt this method.  The first Disney feature animated film to have a complete screenplay written and approved before storyboarding wasOne Hundred and One Dalmatians(1961).[63]However,101 Dalmatianswas "a short-lived experiment"; the next Disney film to follow this method wasThe Great Mouse Detective(1986).[63]
Finally, another key difference is that actors traditionally record vocal tracks for animated films in separate individual sessions; they often meet one another for the first time only at the film'spremiere.[64]Actors usually schedule sessions in therecording studioaround their live-action work.[64]In live-action filmmaking, it is very common for actors to drop out of projects due to scheduling conflicts, while in animation, recording actors separately makes it possible to "get a lot more stars into one movie than" would be possible if those actors needed to be physically present on the same set at the same time.[64]

## Traditional
Traditional animation(also called cel animation or hand-drawn animation) is the process that was used for most animated films of the 20th century.[65]The individual frames of a traditionally animated film are photographs of drawings, first drawn on paper.[66]To create the illusion of movement, each drawing differs slightly from the one before it. The animators' drawings are traced or photocopied onto transparent acetate sheets calledcels,[67]which are filled in with paints in assigned colors or tones on the side opposite the line drawings.[68]The completed character cels are photographed one-by-one against a painted background by arostrum cameraonto motion picture film.[69]
The traditional cel animation process became obsolete by the beginning of the 21st century. In modern traditionally animated films, animators' drawings and the backgrounds are either scanned into or drawn directly into a computer system.[1][70]Various software programs are used to color the drawings and simulate camera movement and effects.[71]The final animated piece is output to one of several delivery media, including traditional35 mm filmand newer media withdigital video.[1][72]The "look" of traditional cel animation is still preserved, and thecharacter animators' work has remained essentially the same over the past 90 years.[60]Some animation producers have used the term "tradigital" (a play on the words "traditional" and "digital") to describe cel animation that uses significant computer technology.
Examples of traditionally animated feature films includePinocchio(United States, 1940),[73]Animal Farm(United Kingdom, 1954),Lucky and Zorba(Italy, 1998), andThe Illusionist(British-French, 2010). Traditionally animated films produced with the aid of computer technology includeThe Lion King(US, 1994),Anastasia(US, 1997),The Prince of Egypt(US, 1998),Akira(Japan, 1988),[74]Spirited Away(Japan, 2001),The Triplets of Belleville(France, 2003), andThe Secret of Kells(Irish-French-Belgian, 2009).

## Full
Full animationis the process of producing high-quality traditionally animated films that regularly use detailed drawings and plausible movement,[75]having a smooth animation.[76]Fully animated films can be made in a variety of styles, from more realistically animated works like those produced by theWalt Disney studio(The Little Mermaid,Beauty and the Beast,Aladdin,The Lion King) to the more 'cartoon' styles of theWarner Bros. animation studio. Many of theDisney animated featuresare examples of full animation, as are non-Disney works,The Secret of NIMH(US, 1982),The Iron Giant(US, 1999), andNocturna(Spain, 2007). Fully animated films are often animated on "twos", sometimes on "ones", which means that 12 to 24 drawings are required for a single second of film.[77]

## Limited
Limited animationinvolves the use of less detailed or more stylized drawings and methods of movement usually a choppy or "skippy" movement animation.[78]Limited animation uses fewer drawings per second, thereby limiting the fluidity of the animation. This is a more economic technique. Pioneered by the artists at the American studioUnited Productions of America,[79]limited animation can be used as a method of stylized artistic expression, as inGerald McBoing-Boing(US, 1951),Yellow Submarine(UK, 1968), and certainanimeproduced in Japan.[80]Its primary use, however, has been in producing cost-effective animated content for media for television (the work of Hanna-Barbera,[81]Filmation,[82]and other TV animation studios[83]) and later theInternet(web cartoons).

## Rotoscoping
Rotoscopingis a technique patented byMax Fleischerin 1917 where animators trace live-action movement, frame by frame.[84]The source film can be directly copied from actors' outlines into animated drawings,[85]as inThe Lord of the Rings(US, 1978), or used in a stylized and expressive manner, as inWaking Life(US, 2001) andA Scanner Darkly(US, 2006). Some other examples areFire and Ice(US, 1983),Heavy Metal(1981), andAku no Hana(Japan, 2013).[citation needed]

## Live-action blending
Live-action/animationis a technique combining hand-drawn characters into live action shots or live-action actors into animated shots.[86]One of the earlier uses was inKoko the Clownwhen Koko was drawn over live-action footage.[87]Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks created a series ofAlice Comedies(1923–1927), in which a live-action girl enters an animated world. Other examples includeAllegro Non Troppo(Italy, 1976),Who Framed Roger Rabbit(US, 1988),Volere volare(Italy 1991),Cool World(US, 1992),The Pagemaster(US, 1994)Space Jam(US, 1996) andOsmosis Jones(US, 2001).[citation needed]

## Stop motion
Stop motionis used to describe animation created by physically manipulating real-world objects and photographing them one frame of film at a time to create the illusion of movement.[88]There are many different types of stop-motion animation, usually named after the materials used to create the animation.[89]Computer software is widely available to create this type of animation; traditional stop-motion animation is usually less expensive but more time-consuming to produce than current computer animation.[89]

## Computer
Computer animationencompasses a variety of techniques, the unifying factor being that the animation is created digitally on a computer.[71][112]2D animation techniques tend to focus on image manipulation while 3D techniques usually build virtual worlds in which characters and objects move and interact.[113]3D animation can create images that seem real to the viewer.[114]

## 2D
2D animationfigures are created or edited on the computer using 2Dbitmap graphicsand 2Dvector graphics.[115]This includes automated computerized versions of traditional animation techniques,interpolatedmorphing,[116]onion skinning[117]and interpolated rotoscoping. 2D animation has many applications, including After Effects Animation,analog computer animation,Flash animation, andPowerPoint animation.Cinemagraphsarestill photographsin the form of ananimated GIFfile of which part is animated.[118]
Final lineadvectionanimation is a technique used in 2D animation,[119]to give artists and animators more influence and control over the final product as everything is done within the same department.[120]Speaking about using this approach inPaperman, John Kahrs said that "Our animators can change things, actually erase away the CG underlayer if they want, and change the profile of the arm."[121]
When working with game animations,skeletal2D animations are commonly created using tools like Spine, DragonBones, Blender COA Tools, Rive, and the built-in Unity editor. The primary benefit of this approach is the ability to reuse images, which reduces the amount of graphics stored in RAM. This principle of maximizing resource efficiency means that by reusing existing elements, you can enhance the visual appeal of animations without needing to create additional graphics.[122]

## 3D
3D animation is digitally modeled and manipulated by an animator. The 3D model maker usually starts by creating a 3Dpolygon meshfor the animator to manipulate.[123]A mesh typically includes many vertices that are connected by edges and faces, which give the visual appearance of form to a 3D object or 3D environment.[123]Sometimes, the mesh is given an internal digital skeletal structure called anarmaturethat can be used to control the mesh by weighting the vertices.[124][125]This process is called rigging and can be used in conjunction withkey framesto create movement.[126]
Other techniques can be applied, mathematical functions (e.g., gravity, particle simulations), simulated fur or hair, and effects, fire andwater simulations.[127]These techniques fall under the category of 3D dynamics.[128]