## Arctic
TheArctic(/ˈɑːr(k)tɪk/;[1][Note 1]fromAncient Greekἄρκτος(árktos)'bear') is thepolar regionofEarththat surrounds theNorth Pole, lying north of theArctic Circle. The Arctic region, from theIERS Reference Meridiantravelling east, consists of parts of northern Norway (Nordland,Troms,Finnmark,SvalbardandJan Mayen), northernmost Sweden (Västerbotten,NorrbottenandLappland), northern Finland (North Ostrobothnia,KainuuandLappi), Russia (Murmansk,Siberia,Nenets Okrug,Novaya Zemlya), the United States (Alaska), Canada (Yukon,Northwest Territories,Nunavut),Danish Realm(Greenland), and northern Iceland (GrímseyandKolbeinsey), along with theArctic Oceanand adjacent seas.
Land within the Arctic region has seasonally varyingsnow and ice cover, with predominantly treelesspermafrostunder thetundra. Arctic seas contain seasonalsea icein many places.
The Arctic region is a unique area among Earth's ecosystems. The cultures in the region and theArctic indigenous peopleshave adapted to its cold and extreme conditions. Life in the Arctic includeszooplanktonandphytoplankton, fish andmarine mammals, birds, land animals, plants, and human societies.[3]Arctic land is bordered by thesubarctic.

## Definition and etymology
The word Arctic comes from theGreekwordἀρκτικόςarktikos"near the Bear, northern"[4]and from the wordἄρκτοςarktosmeaning "bear" for either to theconstellationknown asUrsa Major, the "Great Bear", which is prominent in the northern portion of thecelestial sphere,[5][6]or the constellationUrsa Minor, the "Little Bear", which contains thecelestial north pole(currently very nearPolaris, the current north Pole Star, or North Star).[7]
There are several definitions of what area is contained within the Arctic. The area can be defined as north of theArctic Circle(about 66° 34'N), the approximate southern limit of themidnight sunand thepolar night. Another definition of the Arctic, which is popular withecologists, is the region in theNorthern Hemispherewhere the average temperature for the warmest month (July) is below 10 °C (50 °F); the northernmosttree lineroughly follows theisothermat the boundary of this region.[8][9]

## Climate
Theclimate of the Arcticregion is characterized by cold winters and cool summers. Its precipitation mostly comes in the form ofsnowand is low, with most of the area receiving less than 50 cm (20 in). High winds often stir up snow, creating the illusion of continuous snowfall. Average winter temperatures can go as low as −40 °C (−40 °F), and the coldest recorded temperature is approximately −68 °C (−90 °F). Coastal Arctic climates are moderated by oceanic influences, having generally warmer temperatures and heavier snowfalls than the colder and drier interior areas. The Arctic is affected by currentglobal warming, leading toclimate change in the Arctic, includingArctic sea ice decline, diminished ice in theGreenland ice sheet, andArctic methane emissionsas thepermafrostthaws.[10][11]The melting of Greenland's ice sheet is linked topolar amplification.[12]
Due to the poleward migration of the planet's isotherms (about 56 km (35 mi) per decade during the past 30 years as a consequence of global warming), the Arctic region (as defined bytree lineand temperature) is currently shrinking.[13]Perhaps the most alarming result of this is Arctic sea ice shrinkage. There is a large variance in predictions of Arcticsea iceloss, with models showing near-complete to complete loss in September from 2035 to sometime around 2067.[14][15]

## Flora and fauna
Arctic life is characterized by adaptation to short growing seasons with long periods of sunlight, and cold, dark, snow-covered winter conditions.

## Plants
Arctic vegetationis composed of plants such asdwarf shrubs,graminoids,herbs,lichens, andmosses, which all grow relatively close to the ground, formingtundra. An example of a dwarf shrub is thebearberry. As one moves northward, the amount of warmth available for plant growth decreases considerably. In the northernmost areas, plants are at their metabolic limits, and small differences in the total amount of summer warmth make large differences in the amount of energy available for maintenance, growth, and reproduction. Colder summer temperatures cause the size, abundance, productivity, and variety of plants to decrease. Trees cannot grow in the Arctic, but in its warmest parts, shrubs are common and can reach 2 m (6 ft 7 in) in height;sedges, mosses and lichens can form thick layers. In the coldest parts of the Arctic, much of the ground is bare;non-vascular plantssuch as lichens and mosses predominate, along with a few scattered grasses andforbs(like theArctic poppy).

## Animals
Herbivores on the tundra include theArctic hare,lemming,muskox, andreindeer(caribou). They are preyed on by thesnowy owl,Arctic fox,grizzly bear, andArctic wolf. Thepolar bearis also a predator, though it prefers to hunt for marine life from the ice. There are also manybirdsand marine species endemic to the colder regions. Other terrestrial animals includewolverines,moose,Dall sheep,ermines, andArctic ground squirrels. Marine mammals includeseals,walruses, and several species ofcetacean—baleen whalesand alsonarwhals,orcas, andbelugas.

## Natural resources
There are copiousnatural resources in the Arctic(oil, gas, minerals, freshwater, fish, and, if the subarctic is included, forest) to which modern technology and theeconomic opening up of Russiahave given significant new opportunities. The interest in the tourism industry is also on the increase.
The Arctic contains some of the last and most extensive continuouswildernessareas in the world, and its significance in preservingbiodiversityandgenotypesis considerable. The increasing presence of humans fragments vital habitats. The Arctic is particularly susceptible to the abrasion ofgroundcoverand to the disturbance of the rare breeding grounds of the animals that are characteristic of the region. The Arctic also holds 1/5 of the Earth's water supply.[16]

## Paleontology
During theCretaceous period, the Arctic still had seasonal snows, though only a light dusting and not enough to permanently hinder plant growth. Animals such as theChasmosaurus,Hypacrosaurus,Troodon, andEdmontosaurusmay have all migrated north to take advantage of the summer growing season, and migrated south to warmer climes when winter came. A similar situation may also have been found amongstdinosaursthat lived inAntarcticregions, such as theMuttaburrasaurusof Australia.
However, others claim that dinosaurs lived year-round at very high latitudes, such as near theColville River, which is now at about 70°  N but at the time (70 million years ago) was 10° further north.[17]

## Indigenous population
The earliest inhabitants of North America's central and eastern Arctic are referred to as theArctic small tool tradition(AST) and existedc.2500 BCE. AST consisted of severalPaleo-Eskimocultures, including theIndependence culturesandPre-Dorsetcultures.[18][19]TheDorset culture(Inuktitut:TuniitorTunit) refers to the next inhabitants of central and eastern Arctic. The Dorset culture evolved because of technological and economic changes during 1050–550 BCE. With the exception of theQuebec/Labradorpeninsula, the Dorset culture vanished around 1500 CE.[20]Supported bygenetic testing, evidence shows that descendants of the Dorset culture, known as theSadlermiut, survived in Aivilik,SouthamptonandCoats Islands, until the beginning of the 20th century.[21]
The Dorset /Thule culturetransition dates around the ninth–10th centuries CE. Scientists theorize that there may have been cross-contact between the two cultures with the sharing of technology, such as fashioning harpoon heads, or the Thule may have found Dorset remnants and adapted their ways with the predecessor culture.[22]The evidence suggested that Inuit descend from theBirnirkof Siberia, through the Thule cultureexpandedinto northern Canada and Greenland, where they genetically and culturally completely replaced the IndigenousDorset peoplesometime after 1300 CE.[23]The question of why the Dorset disappeared so completely has led some to suggest that Thule invaders wiped out the Dorset people in "an example of prehistoric genocide."[24]
By 1300 CE, theInuit, present-day Arctic inhabitants and descendants of Thule culture, had settled in west Greenland and moved into east Greenland over the following century (Inughuit,KalaallitandTunumiitare modern Greenlandic Inuit groups descended from Thule). Over time, the Inuit have migrated throughout the Arctic regions of Eastern Russia, the United States, Canada, and Greenland.[25]
OtherCircumpolar North indigenous peoplesinclude theChukchi,Evenks,Iñupiat,Khanty,Koryaks,Nenets,Sámi,Yukaghir,Gwichʼin, andYupik.

## International cooperation and politics
The eight Arctic nations (Canada, Kingdom of Denmark [Greenland & The Faroe Islands], Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Russia, and US) are all members of theArctic Council, as are organizations representing six indigenous populations (TheAleut International Association,Arctic Athabaskan Council,Gwich'in Council International,Inuit Circumpolar Council,Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North, andSaami Council). The council operates on a consensus basis, mostly dealing with environmental treaties and not addressing boundary or resource disputes.
ThoughArctic policy priorities differ, every Arctic nation is concerned about sovereignty/defense, resource development, shipping routes, and environmental protection.[26]Much work remains on regulatory agreements regarding shipping, tourism, andresource developmentin Arctic waters.[27]Arctic shipping is subject to some regulatory control through theInternational Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters, adopted by theInternational Maritime Organizationon 1 January 2017 and applies to all ships in Arctic waters over 500 tonnes.[28][29]
Research in the Arctic has long been a collaborative international effort, evidenced by theInternational Polar Year. TheInternational Arctic Science Committee, hundreds of scientists and specialists of theArctic Council, and the Barents Euro-Arctic Council are more examples of collaborative international Arctic research.[30]

## Territorial claims
While there are several ongoingterritorial claims in the Arctic, no country owns the geographicNorth Poleor the region of the Arctic Ocean surrounding it. The surrounding six Arctic states that border the Arctic Ocean—Canada, the Kingdom of Denmark (with Greenland), Iceland, Norway, Russia, and the United States—are limited to a 200nautical miles(370 km; 230 mi)exclusive economic zone(EEZ) off their coasts. Two Arctic states (Finland and Sweden) do not have direct access to the Arctic Ocean.
Upon ratification of theUnited Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, a country has ten years to make claims to anextended continental shelfbeyond its 200 nautical mile zone.[26][31]Due to this, Norway (which ratified the convention in 1996),[32]Russia (ratified in 1997),[32]Canada (ratified in 2003)[32]and the Kingdom of Denmark (ratified in 2004)[32]launched projects to establish claims that certain sectors of the Arctic seabed should belong to their territories.
On 2 August 2007, two Russianbathyscaphes,MIR-1 and MIR-2, for the first time in history descended to the Arcticseabedbeneath the North Pole and placed there aRussian flagmade of rust-prooftitanium alloy. The flag-placing, duringArktika 2007, generated commentary on and concern for a race for control of the Arctic's vast hydrocarbon resources.[33]
Foreign ministers and other officials representing Canada, the Kingdom of Denmark, Norway, Russia, and the United States met inIlulissat, Greenlandon 28 May 2008 at theArctic Ocean Conferenceand announced theIlulissat Declaration,[34][35]blocking any "new comprehensive international legal regime to govern the Arctic Ocean," and pledging "the orderly settlement of any possible overlapping claims."[26][36]
As of 2012, the Kingdom of Denmark is claiming thecontinental shelfbased on theLomonosov Ridgebetween Greenland and over the North Pole to the northern limit of theexclusive economic zone of Russia.[37]
The Russian Federation is alsoclaiming a large swath of seabedalong the Lomonosov Ridge but, unlike Denmark, confined its claim to its side of the Arctic region. In August 2015, Russia made a supplementary submission for the expansion of the external borders of its continental shelf in theArctic Ocean, asserting that the eastern part of the Lomonosov Ridge and theMendeleyev Ridgeis an extension of theEurasiancontinent. In August 2016, theUN Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelfbegan to consider Russia's submission.[38]
Canada claims theNorthwest Passageas part of itsinternal watersbelonging to Canada, while the United States and most maritime nations[39]regards it as aninternational strait, which means that foreign vessels have right of transit passage.[40]

## Strategic competition
The Arctic is a site of strategic competition betweenworld powers, particularly Russia and NATO. Russia'sNorthern Fleet, stationed in theKola Peninsula, is a major element of its nuclear deterrence strategy. Russia also conducts nuclear weapons tests onNovaya Zemlya, and has sought to promote the use of theNorthern Sea Routein international maritime trade. The Trump administration has focused US attention on the Arctic, with Trump threatening to invade Greenland in 2025 and 2026, seeing direct control over it as essential to US strategic interests. In response to Trump, the United States's NATO allies have sought to divert US attention toward Russian Arctic activities and bolster their own readiness. Two strategically important straits in the Arctic are theGIUK Gapand the Bear Gap, between Svalbard and Norway.[41]

## Exploration
Since 1937, the larger portion of the Asian-side Arctic region has been extensively explored by Soviet and Russian creweddrifting ice stations. Between 1937 and 1991, 88 international polar crews established and occupied scientific settlements on thedrift iceand were carried thousands of kilometers by the ice flow.[42]Modern day scientists now rely more heavily on unmanned buoys and ice-tethered observatories than crewed stations for Arctic research and exploration[43][44]

## Pollution
The Arctic is comparatively clean, although there are certain ecologically difficultlocalized pollutionproblems that present a serious threat to people's health living around these pollution sources. Due to the prevailing worldwide sea and air currents, the Arctic area is the fallout region for long-range transportpollutants, and in some places, the concentrations exceed the levels of densely populated urban areas. An example of this is the phenomenon ofArctic haze, which is commonly blamed on long-range pollutants. Another example is with thebioaccumulationof PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) in Arctic wildlife and people.

## Preservation
There have been many proposals to preserve the Arctic over the years. Most recently a group of states[clarification needed]at theUnited Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, on 21 June 2012, proposed protecting the Arctic, similar to theAntarctic Treaty System. The initial focus of the campaign will be a UN resolution creating a global sanctuary around the pole, and a ban on oil drilling and unsustainable fishing in the Arctic.[45]
The Arctic has climate change rates that are amongst the highest in the world. Due to the major impacts to the region from climate change the near climate future of the region will be extremely different under all scenarios of warming.[46]

## Climate change
Theeffects of climate changein the Arctic include rising temperatures, loss ofsea ice, and melting of theGreenland ice sheet.  The Arctic near-surface temperature is increasing at a rate that is 2–3 times faster than the global average, which is referred to as Arctic amplification.[49]Potentialmethane releasefrom the region, especially through the thawing ofpermafrostandmethane clathrates, is also a concern.[50]Because of theamplified response of the Arcticto global warming, it is often seen as a leading indicator of global warming. The melting of Greenland's ice sheet is linked to polar amplification.[51][52]
The Arctic region is especially vulnerable to the effects of anyclimate change, as has become apparent with the reduction of sea ice in recent years.Climate modelspredict much greaterclimate change in the Arcticthan the global average,[53]resulting in significant international attention to the region. In particular, there are concerns that Arctic shrinkage, a consequence of melting glaciers and other ice in Greenland, could soon contribute to a substantial rise in sea levels worldwide.[54]
The current Arctic warming is leading to ancient carbon being released from thawingpermafrost, leading tomethaneandcarbon dioxideproduction by micro-organisms.[55][56]Release of methane and carbon dioxide stored in permafrost could cause abrupt and severe global warming,[57]as they are potentgreenhouse gases.[58]
Climate change is also predicted to have a large impact on tundra vegetation, causing an increase of shrubs,[60]and having a negative impact on bryophytes and lichens.[61]
Apart from concerns regarding the detrimental effects of warming in the Arctic, some potential opportunities have gained attention. The melting of the ice is making theNorthwest Passage, shipping routes through the northernmost latitudes, more navigable, raising the possibility that the Arctic region will become a primetrade route.[62]One harbinger of the opening navigability of the Arctic took place in the summer of 2016 when theCrystal Serenitysuccessfully navigated the Northwest Passage, a first for a large cruise ship.[63]
In addition, it is believed that the Arctic seabed may contain substantialoil fieldswhich may become accessible if the ice covering them melts.[64]These factors have led to recent international debates as to which nations can claim sovereignty or ownership over the waters of the Arctic.[65][66][67][68]