## Art Nouveau
Art Nouveau(/ˌɑːr(t)nuːˈvoʊ/AR(T)noo-VOH;French:[aʁnuvo]ⓘ;lit.'New Art'),Jugendstilin German, is an internationalstyleof art, architecture, andapplied art, especially thedecorative arts. It was often inspired by natural forms such as the sinuous curves of plants and flowers.[1]Other characteristics of Art Nouveau were a sense of dynamism and movement, often given by asymmetry orwhiplash lines, and the use of modern materials, particularly iron, glass, ceramics and later concrete, to create unusual forms and larger open spaces.[2]It was popular between 1890 and 1910 during theBelle Époqueperiod,[3]and was a reaction against theacademicism,eclecticismandhistoricismof 19th-century architecture and decorative art.
One major objective of Art Nouveau was to break down the traditional distinction between fine arts (especially painting and sculpture) and applied arts. It was most widely used in interior design, graphic arts, furniture, glass art, textiles, ceramics, jewellery and metal work. The style responded to leading 19th-century theoreticians, such as French architectEugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc(1814–1879) and British art criticJohn Ruskin(1819–1900). In Britain, it was influenced byWilliam Morrisand theArts and Crafts movement. German architects and designers sought a spiritually upliftingGesamtkunstwerk('total work of art') that would unify the architecture, furnishings, and art in the interior in a common style, to uplift and inspire the residents.[2]
The first Art Nouveau houses and interior decorationappeared in Brusselsin the 1890s, in the architecture and interior design of houses designed byPaul Hankar,Henry van de Velde, and especiallyVictor Horta, whoseHôtel Tasselwas completed in 1893.[4][5][6]It moved quickly to Paris, where it was adapted byHector Guimard, who saw Horta's work in Brussels and applied the style to the entrances of the newParis Métro. It reached its peak at the1900 Paris International Exposition, which introduced the Art Nouveau work of artists such asLouis Tiffany. It appeared in graphic arts in the posters ofAlphonse Mucha, and the glassware ofRené LaliqueandÉmile Gallé.
From Britain, Belgium and France, Art Nouveau spread to the rest of Europe, taking on different names and characteristics in each country (seeNaming sectionbelow). It often appeared not only in capitals, but also in rapidly growing cities that wanted to establish artistic identities (TurinandPalermoin Italy;Glasgowin Scotland;MunichandDarmstadtin Germany;BarcelonainCatalonia, Spain), as well as in centres of independence movements (Helsinkiin Finland, then part of the Russian Empire).
By 1914, with the beginning of theFirst World War, Art Nouveau was largely exhausted. In the 1920s, it was replaced as the dominant architectural and decorative art style byArt Decoand thenmodernism.[7]The Art Nouveau style began to receive more positive attention from critics in the late 1960s, with a major exhibition of the work ofHector Guimardat theMuseum of Modern Artin 1970.[8]

## Naming
The termArt Nouveauwas first used in the 1880s in the Belgian journalL'Art Moderneto describe the work ofLes Vingt, twenty painters and sculptors seeking reform through art. The name was popularized by theMaison de l'Art Nouveau('House of the New Art'), an art gallery opened in Paris in 1895 by the Franco-Germanart dealerSiegfried Bing. In Britain, the French termArt Nouveauwas commonly used, while in France, it was often called by the termStyle moderne(akin to the British termModern Style), orStyle 1900.[9]In France, it was also sometimes calledStyle Jules Verne(after the novelistJules Verne),Style Métro(afterHector Guimard's iron and glass subway entrances),Art Belle Époque, orArt fin de siècle.[10]
Art Nouveau is known by different names in different languages:Jugendstilin German,Stile Libertyin Italian,Modernismein Catalan, and also known as theModern Stylein English. The style is often related to, but not always identical with, styles that emerged in many countries in Europe and elsewhere at about the same time. Their local names were often used in their respective countries to describe the whole movement.

## Origins
The new art movement had its roots in Britain, in the floral designs ofWilliam Morris, and in theArts and Crafts movementfounded by the pupils of Morris. Early prototypes of the style include theRed Housewith interiors by Morris and architecture byPhilip Webb(1859), and the lavishPeacock RoombyJames Abbott McNeill Whistler. The new movement was also strongly influenced by thePre-Raphaelitepainters, includingDante Gabriel RossettiandEdward Burne-Jones, and especially by British graphic artists of the 1880s, includingSelwyn Image,Heywood Sumner,Walter Crane,Alfred Gilbert, and especiallyAubrey Beardsley.[16]The chair designed byArthur Mackmurdohas been recognized as a precursor of Art Nouveau design.[17]
In France, it was influenced by the architectural theorist and historianEugène Viollet-le-Duc, a declared enemy of the historicalBeaux-Arts architectural style, whose theories on rationalism were derived from his study ofmedieval art:
Viollet-le-Duc was himself a precursor of Art Nouveau: in 1851, atNotre-Dame de Paris, he created a series of mural paintings typical of the style.[22]These paintings were removed in 1945 as deemed non academic. At theChâteau de Roquetailladein theBordeauxregion, his interior decorations dating from 1865 also anticipate Art Nouveau. In his 1872 bookEntretiens sur l'architecture, he wrote, "Use the means and knowledge given to us by our times, without the intervening traditions which are no longer viable today, and in that way we can inaugurate a new architecture. For each function its material; for each material its form and its ornament."[23]This book influenced a generation of architects, includingLouis Sullivan,Victor Horta,Hector Guimard, andAntoni Gaudí.[24]
The French paintersMaurice Denis,Pierre BonnardandÉdouard Vuillardplayed an important part in integrating fine arts painting with decoration. "I believe that before everything a painting must decorate", Denis wrote in 1891. "The choice of subjects or scenes is nothing. It is by the value of tones, the coloured surface and the harmony of lines that I can reach the spirit and wake up the emotions."[25]These painters all did both traditional painting and decorative painting on screens, in glass, and in other media.[26]
Another important influence on the new style wasJaponism. This was a wave of enthusiasm forJapanesewoodblock printing, particularly the works ofHiroshige,Hokusai, andUtagawa Kunisada, which were imported into Europe beginning in the 1870s. The enterprisingSiegfried Bingfounded a monthly journal,Le Japon artistiquein 1888, and published thirty-six issues before it ended in 1891. It influenced both collectors and artists, includingGustav Klimt. The stylised features of Japanese prints appeared in Art Nouveau graphics, porcelain, jewellery, and furniture. Since the beginning of 1860, aFar Easterninfluence suddenly manifested. In 1862, art lovers from London or Paris, could buyJapanese artworks, because in that year, Japan appeared for the first time as an exhibitor at theInternational Exhibitionin London. Also in 1862, in Paris,La Porte Chinoisestore, onRue de Rivoli, was open, where Japaneseukiyo-eand other objects from the Far East were sold. In 1867,Examples of Chinese OrnamentsbyOwen Jonesappeared, and in 1870Art and Industries in Japanby R. Alcock, and two years later, O. H. Moser and T. W. Cutler published books about Japanese art. Some Art Nouveau artists, likeVictor Horta, owned a collection of Far Eastern art, especially Japanese.[11]
New technologies in printing and publishing allowed Art Nouveau to quickly reach a global audience. Art magazines, illustrated with photographs and colourlithographs, played an essential role in popularizing the new style.The Studioin England,Arts et idèesandArt et décorationin France, andJugendin Germany allowed the style to spread rapidly to all corners of Europe.Aubrey Beardsleyin England, andEugène Grasset,Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, andFélix Vallottonachieved international recognition as illustrators.[27]With the posters byJules Chéretfor dancerLoie Fullerin 1893, and byAlphonse Muchafor actressSarah Bernhardtin 1895, the poster became not just advertising, but an art form. Sarah Bernhardt set aside large numbers of her posters for sale to collectors.[28]

## Development – Brussels (1893–1898)
The first Art Nouveau town houses, theHankar HousebyPaul Hankar(1893) and theHôtel TasselbyVictor Horta(1892–1893),[4][5]were built almost simultaneously inBrussels. They were similar in their originality, but very different in their design and appearance.
Victor Horta was among the most influential architects of early Art Nouveau, and his Hôtel Tassel (1892–1893) in Brussels is one of the style's landmarks.[29][30]Horta's architectural training was as an assistant toAlphonse Balat, architect toKing Leopold II, constructing the monumental iron and glassRoyal Greenhouses of Laeken.[31]He was a great admiror ofViollet-le-Duc, with whose ideas he completely identified.[32][33]In 1892–1893, he put this experience to a very different use. He designed the residence of the scientist and professor Émile Tassel on a very narrow and deep site. The central element of the house was the stairway, not enclosed by walls, but open, decorated with a curling wrought-iron railing, and placed beneath a high skylight. The floors were supported by slender iron columns like the trunks of trees. The mosaic floors and walls were decorated with delicatearabesquesin floral and vegetal forms, which became the most popular signature of the style.[34][35]In a short period, Horta built three more town houses, all with open interiors, and all with skylights for maximum interior light: theHôtel Solvay, theHôtel van Eetvelde(forEdmond van Eetvelde), and theMaison & Atelier Horta. All four are now part of aUNESCO World Heritage Site.[5]
Paul Hankar was also an innovator of early Art Nouveau. Born atFrameries, inHainaut, the son of a master stone cutter, he had studied ornamental sculpture and decoration at theRoyal Academy of Fine Artsin Brussels from 1873 to 1884, whilst working as an ornamental sculptor. From 1879 to 1894, he worked in the studio of the architectHenri Beyaert, a master ofeclecticandneoclassical architecture. Through Beyaert, Hankar also became an admirer of Viollet-le-Duc.[36]In 1893, Hankar designed and built the Hankar House, his own residence in Brussels. With a goal to create a synthesis of fine arts and decorative arts, he brought together the sculptor René Janssens and the painterAlbert Ciamberlanito decorate the interior and exterior withsgraffiti, or murals. The façade and balconies featured iron decoration and curling lines in stylised floral patterns, which became an important feature of Art Nouveau. Based on this model, he built several houses for his artist friends. He also designed a series of innovative glass display windows for Brussels shops, restaurants and galleries, in what a local critic called "a veritable delirium of originality".[37]He died in 1901, just as the movement was beginning to receive recognition.[38]
Henry van de Velde, born inAntwerp, was another founding figure in the birth of Art Nouveau. Van de Velde's designs included the interior of his residence in Brussels, theVilla Bloemenwerf(1895).[39][40]The exterior of the house was inspired by theRed House, the residence of writer and theoristWilliam Morris, the founder of theArts and Crafts movement. Trained as a painter, Van de Velde turned to illustration, then to furniture design, and finally to architecture. For the Villa Bloemenwerf, he created the textiles, wallpaper, silverware, jewellery, and even clothing, that matched the style of the residence.[41]Van de Velde went to Paris, where he designed furniture and decoration for the German-Frenchart dealerSiegfried Bing, whose Paris gallery gave the style its name. He was also an early Art Nouveau theorist, demanding the use of dynamic, often opposing lines. Van de Velde wrote: "A line is a force like all the other elementary forces. Several lines put together but opposed have a presence as strong as several forces". In 1906, he departed Belgium forWeimar(Germany), where he founded the Grand-Ducal School of Arts and Crafts, where the teaching of historical styles was forbidden. He played an important role in theGerman Werkbund, before returning to Belgium.[42]
The debut of Art Nouveau architecture in Brussels was accompanied by a wave of Decorative Art in the new style. Important artists includedGustave Strauven, who used wrought iron to achieve baroque effects on Brussels façades; the furniture designerGustave Serrurier-Bovy, known for his highly original chairs and articulated metal furniture; and the jewellery designerPhilippe Wolfers, who made jewellery in the form of dragonflies, butterflies, swans and serpents.[43]
TheBrussels International Expositionheld in 1897 brought international attention to the style; Horta, Hankar, Van de Velde, and Serrurier-Bovy, among others, took part in the design of the fair, andHenri Privat-Livemontcreated the poster for the exhibition.

## Paris – Maison de l'Art Nouveau (1895) and Castel Beranger (1895–1898)
The Franco-German art dealer and publisherSiegfried Bingplayed a key role in publicizing the style. In 1891, he founded a magazine devoted to the art of Japan, which helped publicizeJaponismin Europe. In 1892, he organized an exhibit of seven artists, among themPierre Bonnard,Félix Vallotton,Édouard Vuillard,Toulouse-LautrecandEugène Grasset, which included both modern painting and decorative work. This exhibition was shown at theSociété nationale des beaux-artsin 1895. In the same year, Bing opened a new gallery at22 rue de Provencein Paris, theMaison de l'Art Nouveau, devoted to new works in both the fine and decorative arts. The interior and furniture of the gallery were designed by the Belgian architectHenry van de Velde, one of the pioneers of Art Nouveau architecture. TheMaison de l'Art Nouveaushowed paintings byGeorges Seurat,Paul SignacandToulouse-Lautrec, glass fromLouis Comfort TiffanyandÉmile Gallé, jewellery byRené Lalique, and posters byAubrey Beardsley. The works shown there were not at all uniform in style. Bing wrote in 1902, "Art Nouveau, at the time of its creation, did not aspire in any way to have the honor of becoming a generic term. It was simply the name of a house opened as a rallying point for all the young and ardent artists impatient to show the modernity of their tendencies."[44]
The style was quickly noticed in neighbouring France. After visiting Horta's Hôtel Tassel,Hector Guimardbuilt theCastel Béranger, among the first Paris buildings in the new style, between 1895 and 1898.[nb 1]Parisians had been complaining of the monotony of the architecture of the boulevards built underNapoleon IIIbyGeorges-Eugène Haussmann. The Castel Beranger was a curious blend of Neo-Gothic and Art Nouveau, with curvingwhiplashlines and natural forms. Guimard, a skilled publicist for his work, declared: "What must be avoided at all cost is...the parallel and symmetry. Nature is the greatest builder of all, and nature makes nothing that is parallel and nothing that is symmetric."[46]
Parisians welcomed Guimard's original and picturesque style; the Castel Béranger was chosen as one of the best new façades in Paris, launching Guimard's career. Guimard was given the commission to design the entrances for the newParis Métrosystem, which brought the style to the attention of the millions of visitors to the city's 1900Exposition Universelle.[10]

## ParisExposition Universelle(1900)
The Paris 1900Exposition universellemarked the high point of Art Nouveau. Between April and November 1900, it attracted nearly fifty million visitors from around the world, and showcased the architecture, design, glassware, furniture and decorative objects of the style. The architecture of the Exposition was often a mixture of Art Nouveau andBeaux-Arts architecture: the main exhibit hall, theGrand Palaishad a Beaux-Arts façade completely unrelated to the spectacular Art Nouveau stairway and exhibit hall in the interior.
French designers all made special works for the Exhibition:Laliquecrystal and jewellery; jewellery byHenri VeverandGeorges Fouquet;Daumglass; theManufacture nationale de Sèvresinporcelain; ceramics byAlexandre Bigot; sculpted glass lamps and vases byÉmile Gallé; furniture byÉdouard ColonnaandLouis Majorelle; and many other prominent arts and crafts firms. At the 1900 Paris Exposition,Siegfried Bingpresented a pavilion calledArt Nouveau Bing, which featured six different interiors entirely decorated in the Style.[47][48]
The Exposition was the first international showcase for Art Nouveau designers and artists from across Europe and beyond. Prize winners and participants includedAlphonse Mucha, who made murals for the pavilion ofBosnia-Herzegovinaand designed the menu for the restaurant of the pavilion; the decorators and designersBruno PaulandBruno Möhringfrom Berlin;Carlo BugattifromTurin; Bernhardt Pankok fromBavaria; The Russian architect-designerFyodor Schechtel, andLouis Comfort Tiffanyand Company from the United States.[49]The Viennese architectOtto Wagnerwas a member of the jury, and presented a model of the Art Nouveau bathroom of his own town apartment in Vienna, featuring a glass bathtub.[50]Josef Hoffmanndesigned the Viennese exhibit at the Paris exposition, highlighting the designs of theVienna Secession.[51]Eliel Saarinenfirst won international recognition for his imaginative design of the pavilion of Finland.[52]
While the Paris Exposition was by far the largest, other expositions did much to popularize the style. The1888 Barcelona Universal Expositionmarked the beginning of theModernismestyle in Spain, with some buildings ofLluís Domènech i Montaner. TheEsposizione internazionale d'arte decorativa modernaof 1902 in Turin, Italy, showcased designers from across Europe, includingVictor Hortafrom Belgium andJoseph Maria Olbrichfrom Vienna, along with local artists such asCarlo Bugatti,Galileo ChiniandEugenio Quarti.[53]

## Art Nouveau in France
Following the 1900 Exposition, the capital of Art Nouveau was Paris. The most extravagant residences in the style were built byJules Lavirotte, who entirely covered the façades with ceramic sculptural decoration. The most flamboyant example is theLavirotte Building, at 29,avenue Rapp(1901). Office buildings and department stores featured high courtyards covered with stained glass cupolas and ceramic decoration. The style was particularly popular in restaurants and cafés, includingMaxim'sat3,rue Royale, andLe Train bleuat theGare de Lyon(1900).[54]
The status of Paris attracted foreign artists to the city. The Swiss-born artistEugène Grassetwas one of the first creators of French Art Nouveau posters. He helped decorate the cabaretLe Chat Noirin 1885, made his first posters for theFêtes de Parisand a celebrated poster ofSarah Bernhardtin 1890. In Paris, he taught at the Guérin school of art (École normale d'enseignement du dessin), where his students includedAugusto GiacomettiandPaul Berthon.[55][56]Swiss-bornThéophile-Alexandre Steinlencreated the poster for the PariscabaretLe Chat noirin 1896. TheCzechartistAlphonse Mucha(1860–1939) arrived in Paris in 1888, and in 1895, made a poster for actress Sarah Bernhardt in the playGismondabyVictorien SardouinThéâtre de la Renaissance. The success of this poster led to a contract to produce posters for six more plays by Bernhardt.
The city ofNancyinLorrainebecame the other French capital of the new style. In 1901, theAlliance provinciale des industries d'art, also known as theÉcole de Nancy, was founded, dedicated to upsetting the hierarchy that put painting and sculpture above the decorative arts. The major artists working there included the glass vase and lamp creatorsÉmile Gallé, theDaumbrothers in glass design, and the designerLouis Majorelle, who created furniture with graceful floral and vegetal forms. The architectHenri Sauvagebrought the new architectural style to Nancy with hisVilla Majorellein 1902.
The French style was widely propagated by new magazines, includingThe Studio,Arts et IdéesandArt et Décoration, whose photographs and colourlithographsmade the style known to designers and wealthy clients around the world.
In France, the style reached its summit in 1900, and thereafter slipped rapidly out of fashion, virtually disappearing from France by 1905. Art Nouveau was a luxury style, which required expert and highly-paid craftsmen, and could not be easily or cheaply mass-produced. One of the few Art Nouveau products that could be mass-produced was the perfume bottle, and these are still manufactured in the style today.

## Art Nouveau in Belgium
Belgium was an early centre of Art Nouveau, thanks largely to the architecture ofVictor Horta, who designed one of the first Art Nouveau houses, theHôtel Tasselin 1893, and three other townhouses in variations of the same style. They are nowUNESCO World Heritage sites. Horta had a strong influence on the work of the youngHector Guimard, who came to see the Hôtel Tassel under construction, and later declared that Horta was the "inventor" of the Art Nouveau.[57]Horta's innovation was not the façade, but the interior, using an abundance of iron and glass to open up space and flood the rooms with light, and decorating them with wrought iron columns and railings in curving vegetal forms, which were echoed on the floors and walls, as well as the furniture and carpets which Horta designed.[58]
Paul Hankarwas another pioneer of Brussels' Art Nouveau. His house was completed in 1893, the same year as Horta's Hôtel Tassel, and featuredsgraffitimurals on the façade. Hankar was influenced by bothViollet-le-Ducand the ideas of the EnglishArts and Crafts movement. His conception idea was to bring together decorative and fine arts in a coherent whole. He commissioned the sculptor Alfred Crick and the painterAdolphe Crespin[fr]to decorate the façades of houses with their work. The most striking example was the house and studio built for the artist Albert Ciamberlani at 48,rue Defacqz/Defacqzstraatin Brussels, for which he created an exuberant façade covered withsgraffitomurals with painted figures and ornament, recreating the decorative architecture of theQuattrocento, or 15th-century Italy.[31]Hankar died in 1901, when his work was just receiving recognition.[59]
Gustave Strauvenbegan his career as an assistant designer working with Horta, before he started his own practice at age 21, making some of the most extravagant Art Nouveau buildings in Brussels. His most famous work is theSaint-Cyr Houseat 11,square Ambiorix/Ambiorixsquare. The house is only 4 metres (13 ft) wide, but is given extraordinary height by his elaborate architectural inventions. It is entirely covered bypolychromebricks and a network of curling vegetal forms inwrought iron, in a virtually Art Nouveau-Baroque style.[60]
Other important Art Nouveau artists from Belgium included the architect and designerHenry van de Velde, though the most important part of his career was spent in Germany; he strongly influenced the decoration of theJugendstil. Others included the decoratorGustave Serrurier-Bovy, and the graphic artistFernand Khnopff.[5][61][62]Belgian designers took advantage of an abundant supply ofivoryimported from theBelgian Congo; mixed sculptures, combining stone, metal and ivory, by such artists asPhilippe Wolfers, was popular.[63]

## Nieuwe Kunstin the Netherlands
In the Netherlands, the style was known as theNieuwe Stijl('New Style'), orNieuwe Kunst('New Art'), and it took a different direction from the more floral and curving style in Belgium. It was influenced by the more geometric and stylised forms of the GermanJugendstiland AustrianVienna Secession.[63]It was also influenced by the art and imported woods fromIndonesia, then theDutch East Indies, particularly the designs of the textiles andbatikfromJava.
The most important architect and furniture designer in the style wasHendrik Petrus Berlage, who denounced historical styles and advocated a purely functional architecture. He wrote, "It is necessary to fight against the art of illusion, to and to recognize the lie, in order to find the essence and not the illusion."[64]LikeVictor HortaandGaudí, he was an admirer of architectural theories ofViollet-le-Duc.[64]His furniture was designed to be strictly functional, and to respect the natural forms of wood, rather than bending or twisting it as if it were metal. He pointed to the example of Egyptian furniture, and preferred chairs with right angles. His first and most famous architectural work was theBeurs van Berlage(1896–1903), the Amsterdam Commodities Exchange, which he built following the principles ofconstructivism. Everything was functional, including the lines of rivets that decorated the walls of the main room. He often included very tall towers to his buildings to make them more prominent, a practice used by other Art Nouveau architects of the period, includingJoseph Maria Olbrichin Vienna andEliel Saarinenin Finland.[65]
Other buildings in the style include theAmerican Hotel(1898–1900), by W. Kromhout and H. G. Jansen; andAstoria(1904–1905) byHerman Hendrik BaandersandGerrit van ArkelinAmsterdam; therailway stationinHaarlem(1906–1908), and the former office building of theHolland America Lines(1917) inRotterdam, now theHotel New York.
Prominent graphic artists and illustrators in the style includedJan Toorop, whose work inclined towardmysticismandsymbolism, even in his posters for salad oil. In their colors and designs, they also sometimes showed the influence of the art of Java.[65]
Important figures in Dutch ceramics and porcelain included Jurriaan Kok andTheo Colenbrander. They used colorful floral pattern and more traditional Art Nouveau motifs, combined with unusual forms of pottery and contrasting dark and light colors, borrowed from the batik decoration of Java.[66]

## Modern Style and Glasgow School in Britain
Art Nouveau had its roots in Britain, in theArts and Crafts movementwhich started in the 1860s and reached international recognition by the 1880s. It called for better treatment of decorative arts, and took inspiration in medieval craftmanship and design, and nature.[69]One notable early example of the Modern Style isArthur Mackmurdo's design for the cover of his essay on the city churches ofSir Christopher Wren, published in 1883, as is his Mahogany chair from the same year.[70]
Other important innovators in Britain included the graphic designersAubrey Beardsleywhose drawings featured the curved lines that became the most recognizable feature of the style. Free-flowingwrought ironfrom the 1880s could also be adduced, or some flat floral textile designs, most of which owed some impetus to patterns of 19th century design. Other British graphic artists who had an important place in the style includedWalter CraneandCharles Ashbee.[71]
TheLibertydepartment store in London played an important role, through its colourful stylised floral designs for textiles, and the silver, pewter, and jewellery designs ofManxman(of Scottish descent)Archibald Knox. His jewellery designs in materials and forms broke away entirely from the historical traditions of jewellery design.
For Art Nouveau architecture and furniture design, the most important centre in Britain wasGlasgow, with the creations ofCharles Rennie Mackintoshand theGlasgow School, whose work was inspired byScottish baronial architectureand Japanese design.[72]Beginning in 1895, Mackintosh displayed his designs at international expositions in London, Vienna, and Turin; his designs particularly influenced the Secession Style in Vienna. His architectural creations included the Glasgow Herald Building (1894) and the library of theGlasgow School of Art(1897). He also established a reputation as a furniture designer and decorator, working closely with his wife, the painter and designerMargaret Macdonald Mackintosh. Together they created striking designs that combined geometric straight lines with gently curving floral decoration, particularly a symbol of the style, the Glasgow Rose".[73]
Léon-Victor Solon, made an important contribution to Art Nouveau ceramics as art director at Mintons. He specialised in plaques and intube-linedvases marketed as "secessionist ware" (assumed to be named after theViennese art movement).[74]He provided art nouveau designs for other clients, textile designs for theLeek silk industry[75]and bookbindings (specificallydoublures) for the bookbinder G.T. Bagguley of Newcastle-under-Lyme.
George Skipperwas perhaps the most active Art Nouveau architect in England. The Edward Everard building in Bristol, built during 1900–01 to house theprinting works of Edward Everard, features an Art Nouveau façade. The figures depicted are ofJohannes GutenbergandWilliam Morris, both eminent in the field of printing. A winged figure symbolises the "Spirit of Light", while a figure holding a lamp and mirror symbolises light and truth.

## Jugendstilin Germany
German Art Nouveau is commonly known by its German name,Jugendstil, or 'Youth Style'. The name is taken from the artistic journal,Jugend('Youth'), which was published in Munich. The magazine was founded in 1896 byGeorg Hirth, who remained editor until his death in 1916. The magazine survived until 1940. During the early 20th century,Jugendstilwas applied only to the graphic arts.[76]It referred especially to the forms oftypographyandgraphic designfound in German magazines such asJugend,Pan, andSimplicissimus.Jugendstilwas later applied to other versions of Art Nouveau in Germany, the Netherlands. The term was borrowed from German by several languages of theBaltic statesandNordic countriesto describe Art Nouveau (seeNamingsection).[12][77]
In 1892Georg Hirthchose the nameMunich Secessionfor the Association of Visual Artists ofMunich. TheVienna Secession, founded in 1897,[78]and theBerlin Secessionalso took their names from the Munich group.
The journalsJugendandSimplicissimus, published in Munich, andPan, published in Berlin, were important proponents of theJugendstil.Jugendstilart combined sinuous curves and more geometric lines, and was used for covers of novels, advertisements, andexhibitionposters. Designers often created original styles oftypefacethat worked harmoniously with the image, e.g.Arnold Böcklin typefacein 1904.
Otto Eckmannwas one of the most prominent German artists associated with bothDie JugendandPan. His favourite animal was the swan, and so great was his influence that the swan came to serve as the symbol of the entire movement. Another prominent designer in the style wasRichard Riemerschmid, who made furniture, pottery, and other decorative objects in a sober, geometric style that pointed forward toward Art Deco.[79]The Swiss artistHermann Obrist, living in Munich, illustrated thecoup de fouetor whiplash motif, a highly stylised double curve suggesting motion taken from the stem of thecyclamenflower.
TheDarmstadt Artists' Colonywas founded in 1899 byErnest Ludwig, Grand Duke of Hesse. The architect who built Grand Duke's house, as well as the largest structure of the colony (Wedding tower), wasJoseph Maria Olbrich, one of theVienna Secessionfounders. Other notable artists of the colony werePeter BehrensandHans Christiansen. Ernest Ludwig also commissioned to rebuild the spa complex inBad Nauheimat the beginning of century. A completely newSprudelhof[de]complex was constructed in 1905–1911 under the direction ofWilhelm Jost[de]and attained one of the main objectives of Jugendstil: a synthesis of all the arts.[80]Another member of the reigning family who commissioned an Art Nouveau structure wasPrincess Elisabeth of Hesse and by Rhine. She foundedMarfo-Mariinsky Conventin Moscow in 1908 and its katholikon is recognized as an Art Nouveau masterpiece.[81]
Another notable union in German Empire was theDeutscher Werkbund, founded in 1907 inMunichat the instigation ofHermann Muthesiusby artists of Darmstadt ColonyJoseph Maria Olbrich,Peter Behrens; by another founder ofVienna SecessionJosef Hoffmann, as well as byWiener Werkstätte(founded by Hoffmann), byRichard Riemerschmid,Bruno Pauland other artists and companies.[82]Later BelgianHenry van de Veldejoined the movement.[nb 2]TheGrand-Ducal School of Arts and Crafts[de], founded by him inWeimar, was a predecessor ofBauhaus, one of the most influential currents inModernist architecture.[84]
In Berlin, Jugendstil was chosen for the construction of several railway stations. The most notable[85]isBülowstraßebyBruno Möhring(1900–1902), other examples areMexikoplatz(1902–1904),Botanischer Garten(1908–1909),Frohnau(1908–1910),Wittenbergplatz(1911–1913) andPankow(1912–1914) stations. Another notable structure of Berlin isHackesche Höfe(1906) which used polychrome glazed brick for the courtyard façade.
Art Nouveau in Strasbourg(then part of the German Empire as the capital of theReichsland Elsaß-Lothringen) was a specific brand, in that it combined influences fromNancyandBrussels, with influences fromDarmstadtandVienna, to operate a local synthesis which reflected thehistory of the citybetween the Germanic and the French realms.

## Vienna Secession
Viennabecame the centre of a distinct variant of Art Nouveau, which became known as theVienna Secession. The movement took its name fromMunich Secessionestablished in 1892. Vienna Secession was founded in April 1897 by a group of artists that includedGustav Klimt,Koloman Moser,Josef Hoffmann,Joseph Maria Olbrich,Max Kurzweil,Ernst Stöhr, and others.[78]The painter Klimt became the president of the group. They objected to the conservative orientation towardhistoricismexpressed byVienna Künstlerhaus, the official union of artists. The Secession founded a magazine,Ver Sacrum, to promote their works in all media.[86]The architect Joseph Olbrich designed the domed Secession building in the new style, which became a showcase for the paintings of Gustav Klimt and other Secession artists.
Klimt became the best-known of the Secession painters, often erasing the border between fine art painting and decorative painting.Koloman Moserwas an extremely versatile artist in the style; his work including magazine illustrations, architecture, silverware, ceramics, porcelain, textiles, stained glass windows, and furniture.
The most prominent architect of theVienna SecessionwasOtto Wagner,[87]he joined the movement soon after its inception to follow his students Hoffmann and Olbrich. His major projects included several stations of the urban rail network (theStadtbahn), theLinke Wienzeile Buildings(consisting of Majolica House, the House of Medallions and the house at Köstlergasse). The Karlsplatz Station is now an exhibition hall of theVienna Museum. TheKirche am Steinhofof Steinhof Psychiatric hospital (1904–1907) is a unique and finely crafted example of Secession religious architecture, with a traditional domed exterior but sleek, modern gold and white interior lit by abundance of modern stained glass.
In 1899Joseph Maria Olbrichmoved toDarmstadt Artists' Colony, in 1903Koloman MoserandJosef Hoffmannfounded theWiener Werkstätte, a training school and workshop for designers and craftsmen of furniture, carpets, textiles and decorative objects.[88]In 1905 Koloman Moser andGustav Klimtseparated from Vienna Secession, later in 1907 Koloman Moser leftWiener Werkstätteas well, while its other founder Josef Hoffmann joined theDeutscher Werkbund.[82]Gustav Klimt and Josef Hoffmann continued collaborating, they organizedKunstschau Exhibition[de]in 1908 inViennaand built theStoclet PalaceinBrussels(1905–1911) that announced the coming ofmodernist architecture.[89][90]It was designated as aWorld Heritage SitebyUNESCOin June 2009.[91]

## HungarianSzecesszió
The pioneer and prophet of theSzecesszió('Secession' in Hungarian), the architectÖdön Lechner, created buildings which marked a transition from historicism to modernism for Hungarian architecture.[93]His idea for a Hungarian architectural style was the use ofarchitectural ceramicsand oriental motifs. In his works, he used pygorganite placed in production by 1886 byZsolnay Porcelain Manufactory.[93]This material was used in the construction of notable Hungarian buildings of other styles, e.g. theHungarian Parliament BuildingandMatthias Church.
Works by Ödön Lechner[94]include theMuseum of Applied Arts(1893–1896), other building with similar distinctive features areGeological Museum(1896–1899) and The Postal Savings Bank building (1899–1902), all inBudapest. However, due to the opposition of Hungarian architectural establishment to Lechner's success, he soon was unable to get new commissions comparable to his earlier buildings.[93]But Lechner was an inspiration and a master to the following generation of architects who played the main role in popularising the new style.[93]Within the process ofMagyarizationnumerous buildings were commissioned to his disciples in outskirts of the kingdom: e.g.Marcell Komor[hu]andDezső Jakabwere commissioned to build theSynagogue(1901–1903) and Town Hall (1908–1910) in Szabadka (nowSubotica,Serbia), County Prefecture (1905–1907) andPalace of Culture(1911–1913) in Marosvásárhely (nowTârgu Mureș,Romania). Later Lechner himself built theBlue Churchin Pozsony (present-dayBratislava,Slovakia) in 1909–1913.
Another important architect wasKároly Kóswho was a follower ofJohn RuskinandWilliam Morris. Kós took the FinnishNational Romanticismmovement as a model and the Transylvanian vernacular as the inspiration.[95]His most notable buildings include the Roman Catholic Church inZebegény(1908–09), pavilions for the Budapest Municipal Zoo (1909–1912) and the Székely National Museum in Sepsiszentgyörgy (nowSfântu Gheorghe, Romania, 1911–12).
The movement that promoted Szecesszió in arts wasGödöllőArt Colony, founded byAladár Körösfői-Kriesch, also a followerJohn RuskinandWilliam Morrisand a professor at the Royal School of Applied Arts inBudapestin 1901.[96]Its artists took part in many projects, including theFranz Liszt Academy of Musicin Budapest.[97]
An associate to Gödöllő Art Colony,[98]Miksa Róthwas also involved in several dozen Szecesszió projects, including Budapest buildings includingGresham Palace(stained glass, 1906) andTörök Bank[fr](mosaics, 1906) and also created mosaics and stained glass forPalace of Culture(1911–1913) in Marosvásárhely.
A notable furniture designer isÖdön Faragó[hu]who combined traditional popular architecture, oriental architecture and international Art Nouveau in a highly picturesque style.Pál Horti[hu], another Hungarian designer, had a much more sober and functional style, made of oak with delicate traceries of ebony and brass.

## Secession in Bohemia, Moravia and Slovakia
The most notable Secession buildings in Prague are examples oftotal artwith distinctive architecture, sculpture and paintings.[99]The main railway station(1901–1909) was designed byJosef Fantaand features paintings ofVáclav Jansaand sculptures ofLadislav ŠalounandStanislav Suchardaalong with other artists. TheMunicipal House(1904–1912) was designed byOsvald Polívkaand Antonín Balšánek, painted by the Czech painterAlphonse Muchaand features sculptures ofJosef MařatkaandLadislav Šaloun. Polívka, Mařatka, and Šaloun simultaneously cooperated in the construction ofNew City Hall(1908–1911) along withStanislav Sucharda, and Mucha later paintedSt. Vitus Cathedral's stained glass windows in his distinctive style.
The most important Czech architect of this period wasJan Kotěra, who studied in Vienna under Otto Wagner. His best-known works are the Peterka House at 12 Wenceslas Square in Prague (1899–1900), theNational HouseinProstějov(1905–1907) and theMuseum of Eastern BohemiainHradec Králové(1909–1912). Many important Vienesse architects were born inMoraviaorAustrian Silesia, likeJosef Hoffmann,Hubert Gessner,Joseph Maria OlbrichandLeopold Bauer.
The style of combining Hungarian Szecesszió and national architectural elements was typical for aSlovakarchitectDušan Jurkovič. His most original works are the Cultural House in Szakolca (nowSkalicainSlovakia, 1905), the buildings of spa inLuhačovice(now Czech Republic) in 1901–1903 and 35 war cemeteries nearNowy ŻmigródinGalicia(now Poland), most of them heavily influenced by local Lemko (Rusyn) folk art and carpentry (1915–1917).

## Secession in Galicia
The most important centres of Secession inGaliciawereKraków,LvivandBielsko-Biała. The most important example of the style in Kraków is thePalace of Art(1898–1901), designed byFranciszek Mączyńskiunder the influence of theSecession Hallin Vienna. Other important works Mączyński designed in Kraków together withTadeusz Stryjeński: theHouse Under the Globe(1904–1905) and theOld Theater(1903–1906). The most important interior designers wereStanisław WyspiańskiandJózef Mehoffer, who designed many stained glass windows and building interiors. The most important work of the former are the stained glasses in theFranciscan Churchand in the House of the Krakow Medical Society (1905) and of the latter in the interior of theHouse Under the Globe.
In Lviv the most important architect wasWładysław Sadłowski, who studied in Vienna and was influenced byOtto Wagner. He designed theLviv railway station(1899–1904), theLviv's Philharmonic(1905–1908), and theIndustrial School(1907–1908). Other important architected, also inspired by Wagner, wasIvan Levynskyi.
One of the most famous buildings in Bielsko-Biała is the so-calledFrog Houseby Emanuel Rost (1903). Other important examples of Secession were designed by Vienesse architects:Max Fabiani, the author of the house at 1 Barlickiego Street (1900) as well asLeopold Bauer, who designed the house at 51 Stojałowskiego Street (1903) and the rebuilding of theSaint Nicholas' Cathedral(1909–10).

## Secession in Slovenia, Bosnia, Croatia and Trieste
The most prolificSlovenianSecession architect wasCiril Metod Koch.[100]He studied atOtto Wagner's classes in Vienna and worked in the Laybach (nowLjubljana,Slovenia) City Council from 1894 to 1923. After the earthquake in Laybach in 1895, he designed many secular buildings in Secession style that he adopted from 1900 to 1910:[100]Pogačnik House (1901), Čuden Building (1901), The Farmers Loan Bank (1906–07), renovated Hauptmann Building in Secession style in 1904. The highlight of his career was the Loan Bank in Radmannsdorf (nowRadovljica) in 1906.[100]
Other important Slovene architect, who was active also in Bosnia, wasJosip Vancaš, the authot of such works likeGrand Hotel Union(1902–1903) or City Savings Bank in Ljubljana (1902–1903) as well as theJešua D. Salom Mansion(1901) and the Central Post Office in Sarajevo (1907–1913). AlsoJože PlečnikandMax Fabiani, both importantVienna Secessionarchitects, were born in Slovenia. The latter designed some buildings in Slovenia and Trieste, like the Bartoli House inTrieste(1906).
In Croatia, the most important examples of Secession include theKallina Housein Zagreb byVjekoslav Bastl(1903–1904) and theCroatian State Archivesin Zagreb byRudolf Lubinski(1911–1913).

## Arta 1900 or Art Nouveau in Romania
Art Nouveau appeared in Romania during the same years as in Western Europe (early 1890s until the outbreak of World War I in 1914), but here few of the buildings are in this style, theBeaux-Artsstyle being predominant. The most famous is theConstanța Casino. Most of the Romanian examples of Art Nouveau architecture are actually mixes of Beaux Arts and Art Nouveau, like the Romulus Porescu House or house no. 61 on Strada Vasile Lascăr, both in Bucharest.[104]This is similar to what was happening in France, where eclecticism was more popular, pure Art Nouveau buildings and structures being relatively rare. Despite most houses from the reign of Carol I being Beaux-Arts, some of them have Art Nouveau stoves inside, since the style of the exterior did not always dictate that of the stove or the entire interior.
One of the most notable Art Nouveau painters from Romania wasȘtefan Luchian, who quickly took over the innovative and decorative directions of Art Nouveau for a short period of time. This period coincided with the founding of the Ileana Society in 1897, of which he was a founding member, a society that organized an exhibition at the Union Hotel titledThe Exhibition of Independent Artists(1898) and published theIleana Magazine.[105]
Transylvaniahas examples of both Art Nouveau and Romanian Revival buildings, the former being from the Austro-Hungarian era. Most of them can be found inOradea, nicknamed the "Art Nouveau capital of Romania",[106]but also inTimișoara,Târgu MureșandSibiu.[107][108][109]

## Stile Libertyin Italy
Art Nouveau in Italy was known asarte nuova,stile floreale,stile modernoand especiallystile Liberty.Liberty styletook its name fromArthur Lasenby Libertyand the store he founded in 1874 in London,Libertydepartment store, which specialised in importing ornaments, textiles and art objects from Japan and the Far East, and whose colourful textiles which were particularly popular in Italy. Notable Italian designers in the style includedGalileo Chini, whose ceramics were often inspired both bymajolicapatterns. He was later known as a painter and a theatrical scenery designer; he designed the sets for two celebrated Puccini operasGianni SchicchiandTurandot.[110][111][12]
Liberty style architecture varied greatly, and often followed historical styles, particularly the Baroque. Façades were often drenched with decoration and sculpture. Examples of the Liberty style include the Villino Florio (1899–1902) byErnesto BasileinPalermo; thePalazzo CastiglioniinMilanbyGiuseppe Sommaruga(1901–1903); Milan, and theCasa Guazzoni(1904–05) in Milan by Giovanni Battista Bossi (1904–06).[112]
Colorful frescoes, painted or in ceramics, and sculpture, both in the interior and exterior, were a popular feature of Liberty style. They drew upon both classical and floral themes. as in the baths of Acque della Salute, and in the Casa Guazzoni in Milan.
The most important figure inLiberty styledesign wasCarlo Bugatti, the son of an architect and decorator, as well as the father of the Liberty sculptorRembrandt Bugatti, and of the automobile designerEttore Bugatti. He studied at theMilanese Academy of Brera, and later theAcadémie des Beaux-Artsin Paris. His work was distinguished by its exoticism and eccentricity, included silverware, textiles, ceramics, and musical instruments, but he is best remembered for his innovative furniture designs, shown first in the 1888 Milan Fine Arts Fair. His furniture often featured a keyhole design, and had unusual coverings, including parchment and silk, and inlays of bone and ivory. It also sometimes had surprising organic shapes, copied after snails and cobras.[113]

## Art Nouveau and Secession in Serbia
Due to the close proximity to Austria–Hungary andVojvodinabeing part of the empire until 1918, both the Vienna Secession and Hungarian Szecesszió were prevalent movements in what is today's northern Serbia, as well as the Capital ofBelgrade.[114]Famous Austrian and Hungarian architects would design many buildings inSubotica,Novi Sad,Palić,Zrenjanin,Vrbas,Senta, andKikinda. Art Nouveau heritage inBelgrade,Pančevo,Aranđelovac, andVrnjačka Banjaare a mixture of French, German, Austrian, Hungarian, and local Serbian movements. From the curvy floral beauty of the Subotica's Synagogue to the Morava-style inspired rosettes on Belgrade's telegraph building, Art Nouveau architecture takes various shapes in present-day Serbia.
In the early 1900s, north of the Sava and the Danube, resurgent Hungarian national sentiment infused the buildings inSuboticaandSentawith local floral ethnic motifs, while in the tiny Kingdom of Serbia, national romantics like Branko Tanezević and Dragutin Inkiostiri-Medenjak (both born in the Austro-Hungarian Empire), translated Serbia's traditional motifs into marvellous buildings. Other architects, like Milan Antonović and Nikola Nestorović brought the then-fashionable sinuous lines and natural motifs to the homes and businesses of their wealthy patrons, so they could show off their worldliness and keeping up with the trends in Paris, Munich and Vienna.[115]

## ModernismoandModernismein Spain
A highly original variant of the style emerged inBarcelona,Catalonia, at about the same time that the Art Nouveau style appeared in Belgium and France. It was calledModernismein Catalan andModernismoin Spanish. Its most famous creator wasAntoni Gaudí. Gaudí used floral and organic forms in a very novel way inPalau Güell(1886–1890). According to UNESCO, "the architecture of the park combined elements from the Arts and Crafts movement, Symbolism, Expressionism, and Rationalism, and presaged and influenced many forms and techniques of 20th-century Modernism."[117][118][119]He integrated crafts asceramics,stained glass,wrought ironworkforgingandcarpentryinto his architecture. In hisGüell Pavilions(1884–1887) and thenParc Güell(1900–1914) he also used a new technique calledtrencadís, which used waste ceramic pieces. His designs from about 1903, theCasa Batlló(1904–1906) andCasa Milà(1906–1912),[116]are most closely related to the stylistic elements of Art Nouveau.[120]Later structures such asSagrada Famíliacombined Art Nouveau elements with revivalistNeo-Gothic.[120]Casa Batlló,Casa Milà,Güell Pavilions, andParc Güellwere results of his collaboration withJosep Maria Jujol, who himself created houses inSant Joan Despí(1913–1926), several churches nearTarragona(1918 and 1926) and the sinuous Casa Planells (1924) inBarcelona.
Besides the dominating presence of Gaudí,Lluís Domènech i Montaneralso used Art Nouveau in Barcelona in buildings such as theCastell dels Tres Dragons(1888),Casa Lleó Morera,Palau de la Música Catalana(1905) andHospital de Sant Pau(1901–1930).[120]The two latter buildings have been listed byUNESCOasWorld Cultural Heritage.[121]
Another major modernista wasJosep Puig i Cadafalch, who designed theCasa Martíand itsEls Quatre Gatscafé, the Casimir Casaramona textile factory (now theCaixaFòrumart museum), Casa Macaya,Casa Amatller, the Palau del Baró de Quadras (housing Casa Àsia for 10 years until 2013) and theCasa de les Punxes('House of Spikes').
Adistinctive Art Nouveau movementwas also in theValencian Community. Some of the notable architects were Demetrio Ribes Marco,Vicente Pascual Pastor,Timoteo Briet Montaud, andJosé María Manuel Cortina Pérez. Valencian Art Nouveau defining characteristics are a notable use of ceramics in decoration, both in the façade and in ornamentation, and also the use of Valencian regional motives.
Another remarkable variant is theMadrilenian Art NouveauorModernismo madrileño, with such notable buildings as theLongoria Palace, theCasino de Madridor theCementerio de la Almudena, among others. Renowned modernistas from Madrid were architectsJosé López Sallaberry,Fernando Arbós y TremantiandFrancisco Andrés Octavio[es].
TheModernismemovement left a wide art heritage including drawings, paintings, sculptures, glass and metal work, mosaics, ceramics, and furniture. A part of it can be found inMuseu Nacional d'Art de Catalunya.
Inspired by a Paris café calledLe Chat Noir, where he had previously worked,Pere Romeu i Borràs[ca]decided to open a café in Barcelona that was namedEls Quatre Gats(Four Cats in Catalan).[122]The café became a central meeting point for Barcelona's most prominent figures ofModernisme, such asPablo PicassoandRamon Casas i Carbówho helped to promote the movement by his posters and postcards. For the café he created a picture calledRamon Casas and Pere Romeu on a Tandemthat was replaced with his another composition entitledRamon Casas and Pere Romeu in an Automobilein 1901, symbolizing the new century.
Antoni Gaudídesigned furniture for many of the houses he built; one example is an armchair called thefor the Battle House. He influenced another notable Catalan furniture designer,Gaspar Homar[ca](1870–1953) who often combined marquetry and mosaics with his furnishings.[123]

## Arte Novain Portugal
The Art Nouveau variant inAveiro(Portugal) was calledArte Nova, and its principal characteristic feature was ostentation: the style was used by bourgeoisie who wanted to express their wealth on the façades while leaving the interiors conservative.[125]Another distinctive feature of Arte Nova was the use of locally produced tiles with Art Nouveau motifs.[125]
The most influential artist of Arte Nova was Francisco Augusto da Silva Rocha.[125]Though he was not trained as an architect, he designed many buildings in Aveiro and in other cities in Portugal.[126][125]One of them, the Major Pessoa residence, has both an Art Nouveau façade and interior, and now hosts the Museum of Arte Nova.[125]
There are other examples of Arte Nova in other cities of Portugal.[127][128]Some of them are theMuseum-Residence Dr. Anastácio GonçalvesbyManuel Joaquim Norte Júnior[pt](1904–1905) inLisbon,Café MajesticbyJoão Queiroz[pt](1921) andLivraria Lellobookstore byXavier Esteves[pt](1906), both inPorto.

## Finland
Art Nouveau was popular in theNordic countries, where it was usually known asJugendstil, and was often combined with theNational Romantic Styleof each country. The Nordic country with the largest number of Jugendstil buildings is theGrand Duchy of Finland, then a part ofRussian Empire.[129]The Jugendstil period coincided withGolden Age of Finnish Artand national awakening. AfterParis Expositionin 1900 the leading Finnish artist wasAkseli Gallen-Kallela.[130]He is known for his illustrations of theKalevala, the Finnish national epic, as well as for painting numerous Judendstil buildings in the Duchy.
The architects of the Finnish pavilion at the Exposition wereHerman Gesellius,Armas Lindgren, andEliel Saarinen. They worked together from 1896 to 1905 and created many notable buildings inHelsinkiincludingPohjola Insurance building(1899–1901) andNational Museum of Finland(1905–1910)[131]as well as their joint residenceHvitträskinKirkkonummi(1902). Architects were inspired by Nordic legends and nature, rough granite façade thus became a symbol for belonging to the Finnish nation.[132]After the firm dissolved, Saarinen designed theHelsinki Railway Station(1905–1914) in clearer forms, influenced by American architecture.[132]The sculptor who worked with Saarinen in construction of National Museum of Finland and Helsinki Railway Station wasEmil Wikström.
Another architect who created several notable works in Finland wasLars Sonck. His major Jugendstil works includeTampere Cathedral(1902–1907),Ainola, the home ofJean Sibelius(1903), Headquarters of the Helsinki Telephone Association (1903–1907) andKallio Churchin Helsinki (1908–1912). Also,Magnus Schjerfbeck, brother ofHelene Schjerfbeck, madetuberculosissanatoriumknown asNummela Sanatoriumin 1903 using the Jugendstil style.[133][134][135]

## Norway
Norway also was aspiring independence (from Sweden) and local Art Nouveau was connected with a revival inspired byVikingfolk art and crafts. Notable designers included Lars Kisarvik, who designed chairs with traditional Viking andCelticpatterns, andGerhard Munthe, who designed a chair with a stylised dragon-head emblem from ancient Viking ships, as well as a wide variety of posters, paintings and graphics.[136]
The Norwegiantown of Ålesundis regarded as the main centre of Art Nouveau in Scandinavia because it was completely reconstructed after a fire of 23 January 1904.[137]About 350 buildings were built between 1904 and 1907 under an urban plan designed by the engineer Frederik Næsser. The merger of unity and variety gave birth to a style known as Ål Stil. Buildings of the style have linear decor and echoes of both Jugendstil and vernacular elements, e.g. towers ofstave churchesor the crested roofs.[137]One of the buildings, Swan Pharmacy, now hosts theArt Nouveau Centre.

## Sweden and Denmark
Jugendstil masterpieces of other Nordic countries includeEngelbrektskyrkan(1914) andRoyal Dramatic Theatre(1901–1908) inStockholm, Sweden[138]and former City Library (nowDanish National Business Archives) inAarhus, Denmark (1898–1901).[139]The architect of the latter isHack Kampmann, then a proponent ofNational Romantic Stylewho also createdCustom House,TheatreandVilla KampeninAarhus. Denmark's most notable Art Nouveau designer was the silversmithGeorg Jensen. TheBaltic Exhibitionin Malmö 1914 can be seen as the last major manifestation of the Jugendstil in Sweden.[140]

## Modernin Russia
Модерн('Modern') was a very colourful Russian variation of Art Nouveau which appeared in Moscow andSaint Petersburgin 1898 with the publication of a new art journal,Мир искусства(Mir Iskusstva, 'The World of Art'), by Russian artistsAlexandre BenoisandLéon Bakst, and chief editorSergei Diaghilev. The magazine organized exhibitions of leading Russian artists, includingMikhail Vrubel,Konstantin Somov,Isaac Levitan, and the book illustratorIvan Bilibin. The World of Art style made less use of the vegetal and floral forms of French Art Nouveau; it drew heavily upon the bright colours and exotic designs of Russian folklore and fairy tales. The most influential contribution of theMir Iskusstvawas the creation of a new ballet company, theBallets Russes, headed by Diaghilev, with costumes and sets designed by Bakst and Benois. The new ballet company premiered in Paris in 1909, and performed there every year through 1913. The exotic and colourful sets designed by Benois and Bakst had a major impact on French art and design. The costume and set designs were reproduced in the leading Paris magazines,L'Illustration,La Vie parisienneandGazette du bon ton, and the Russian style became known in Paris asà la Bakst. The company was stranded in Paris first by the outbreak of World War I, and then by theRussian Revolutionin 1917, and ironically never performed in Russia.[141]
Of Russian architects, the most prominent in the pure Art Nouveau style wasFyodor Schechtel. The most famous example is theRyabushinsky Housein Moscow. It was built by a Russian businessman and newspaper owner, and then, after theRussian Revolution, became the residence of the writerMaxim Gorky, and is now theGorky Museum. Its main staircase, made of a polished aggregate of concrete, marble and granite, has flowing, curling lines like the waves of the sea, and is illuminated by a lamp in the form of a floating jellyfish. The interior also features doors, windows and ceiling decorated with colorful frescoes of mosaic.[142]Schechtel, who is also considered a major figure inRussian symbolism, designed several other landmark buildings in Moscow, including the rebuilding of theMoscow Yaroslavsky railway station, in a more traditional Moscow revival style.[142]
Other Russian architects of the period createdRussian Revival architecture, which drew from historicRussian architecture. These buildings were created mostly in wood, and referred to theArchitecture of Kievan Rus'. One example is the Teremok House inTalashkino(1901–1902) bySergey Malyutin, and Pertsova House (also known as Pertsov House) in Moscow (1905–1907). He also was a member ofMir iskusstvamovement. TheSaint PetersburgarchitectNikolai Vasilyevbuilt in a range of styles before emigrating in 1923. This building is most notable for stone carvings made by Sergei Vashkov inspired by the carvings ofCathedral of Saint DemetriusinVladimirandSaint George Cathedral in Yuryev-Polskyof the 12th and 13th centuries. Another example of this Russian Revival architecture is theMarfo-Mariinsky Convent(1908–1912), an updated Russian Orthodox Church byAlexey Shchusev, who later, ironically, designedLenin's Mausoleumin Moscow.
Several art colonies in Russia in this period were built in theRussian Revivalstyle. The two best-known colonies wereAbramtsevo, funded bySavva Mamontov, andTalashkino,Smolensk Governorate, funded byPrincess Maria Tenisheva.

## UkrainianModernarchitecture
Early 20th-century architecture in Ukrainian lands (southwestern part of the Russian Empire,Eastern Galicia,BukovinaandTranscarpathiain Austria-Hungary) developed under the influence ofUkrainian folk architecture, as well as trends of European Art Nouveau, such asZakopane Style. Ukrainian "modern" architecture first came to prominence inPoltava Governorate, where its most active promoters wereVasyl KrychevskyiandOpanas Slastion. In the late 1900s and early 1910s, a number of buildings in what was then known simply as "Ukrainian style" were constructed inKyiv,Kharkiv,Odesa,Katerynoslavand a number of other places in the Russian Empire. InWestern Ukraine, which was at that time part of Austria-Hungary, thelocal Ukrainian stylewas influenced byHutsularchitecture, as well as Western European trends and influences fromGreat Ukraine.[143]

## Jūgendstils(Art Nouveau in Riga)
Riga, the present-day capital ofLatvia, was at the time one of the major cities of theRussian Empire.Art Nouveau architecture in Riganevertheless developed according to its own dynamics, and the style became overwhelmingly popular in the city. Soon after the Latvian Ethnographic Exhibition in 1896 and the Industrial and Handicrafts Exhibition in 1901, Art Nouveau became the dominant style in the city.[144]Thus Art Nouveau architecture accounts for one-third of all the buildings in the centre of Riga, making it the city with the highest concentration of such buildings anywhere in the world. The quantity and quality of Art Nouveau architecture was among the criteria for including Riga inUNESCO World Cultural Heritage.[145]
There were different variations of Art Nouveau architecture in Riga:
Some laterNeo-Classicalbuildings also contained Art Nouveau details.

## Style Sapinin La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland
A variation calledStyle Sapin('Fir-tree Style') emerged inLa Chaux-de-Fondsin theCanton of Neuchâtelin Switzerland. The style was launched by the painter and artistCharles l’Eplattenierand was inspired especially by thesapin, 'firtree', and other plants and wildlife of theJura Mountains. One of his major works was the crematorium in the town, which featured triangular tree forms, pine cones, and other natural themes from the region. The style also blended in the more geometric stylistic elements ofJugendstilandVienna Secession.[146]
Another notable building in the style is theVilla FalletLa Chaux-de-Fonds, a chalet designed and built in 1905 by a student of L'Eplattenier, the eighteen-year-oldLe Corbusier. The form of the house was a traditional Swisschalet, but the decoration of the façade included triangular trees and other natural features. Le Corbusier built two more chalets in the area, including the Villa Stotzer, in a more traditional chalet style.[147][146][148][149]

## Tiffany Styleand Louis Sullivan in the United States
In the United States, the firm ofLouis Comfort Tiffanyplayed a central role in American Art Nouveau. Born in 1848, he studied at theNational Academy of Designin New York City, began working with glass at the age of 24, entered the family business started by his father, and in 1885 set up his own enterprise devoted to fine glass, and developed new techniques for its colouring. In 1893, he began making glass vases and bowls, again developing new techniques that allowed more original shapes and colouring, and began experimenting with decorative window glass. Layers of glass were printed, marbled and superimposed, giving an exceptional richness and variety of colour in 1895 his new works were featured in the Art Nouveau gallery of Siegfried Bing, giving him a new European clientele. After the death of his father in 1902, he took over the entire Tiffany enterprise, but still devoted much of his time to designing and manufacturing glass art objects. At the urging ofThomas Edison, he began to manufacture electric lamps with multicoloured glass shades in structures of bronze and iron, or decorated with mosaics, produced in numerous series and editions, each made with the care of a piece of jewellery. A team of designers and craftsmen worked on each product. The Tiffany lamp in particular became one of the icons of the Art Nouveau, but Tiffany's craftsmen designed and made extraordinary windows, vases, and other glass art. Tiffany's glass also had great success at the1900 Exposition Universellein Paris; his stained glass window called theFlight of Soulswon a gold medal.[150]The Columbian Exposition was an important venue for Tiffany; a chapel he designed was shown at the Pavilion of Art and Industry. The Tiffany Chapel, along with one of the windows of Tiffany's home in New York, are now on display at theCharles Hosmer Morse Museum of American ArtinWinter Park, Florida.
Another important figure in American Art Nouveau was the architectLouis Sullivan. Sullivan was a leading pioneer of American modern architecture. He was the founder of theChicago School, the architect of some of the first skyscrapers, and the teacher ofFrank Lloyd Wright. His most famous saying was "Form follows function." While the form of his buildings was shaped by their function, his decoration was an example of American Art Nouveau. At the 1893World's Columbian Expositionin Chicago, most famous for the neoclassical architecture of its renownedWhite City, he designed a spectacular Art Nouveau entrance for the very functional Transportation Building.[151][152]
While the architecture of hisCarson, Pirie, Scott and Company Building(1899) (now theSullivan Center) was strikingly modern and functional, he surrounded the windows with stylised floral decoration. He invented equally original decoration for theNational Farmer's Bank of Owatonna, Minnesota (1907–1908) and the Merchants' National Bank in Grinell, Iowa. He invented a specifically American variety of Art Nouveau, declaring that decorative forms should oscillate, surge, mix and derive without end. He created works of great precision which sometimes combined Gothic with Art Nouveau themes.[153]
Also worth noting are theUhl brothersfrom Toledo, Ohio, who set new standards in metal furniture production with their designs for theToledo Metal Furniture Co.

## Art Nouveau in Argentina
Flooded with European immigrants, Argentina welcomed all artistic and architectural European styles, including Art Nouveau. There was an environment of huge investments and flexible rules for construction, which encouraged young architects from Europe to come and grow their portfolio to later go back to Europe. As a result of this, Argentina became the country outside of Europe with most art nouveau buildings.[154]Cities with the most notable Art Nouveau heritage in Argentina areBuenos Aires,RosarioandMar del Plata.[155]
Paris was a prototype for Buenos Aires with the construction of large boulevards and avenues in the 19th century.[154]The local style along with French influence was also following Italian Liberty as many architects (Virginio Colombo,Francisco Gianotti,Mario Palanti) were Italians. In works ofJulián García Núñez[es]Catalan influence can be noted as he completed his studies in Barcelona in 1900 as well as in the work of Eduardo Rodríguez Ortega.[154]The influence ofVienna Secessioncan be found at Paso y Viamonte building, Club Español, Regimiento de Granaderos a Caballo and the Savoy hotel.[154]
Some local features are the adaptation to the previously existent "chorizo house" format of buildings, which implied a relatively narrow façade for an actually deep building inside of the block, with multiple patios or holes for air and light; as well as the characteristic "cut corners" on every block that was a requirement by law in Buenos Aires since the end of the 1800s; material availability was also different than in Europe, and buildings will often be covered of a "simil piedra París" which was an imitation of the Parisian stone made by mixing cement with sand and different minerals.
The introduction of Art Nouveau inRosariois connected toFrancisco Roca Simó[es]who trained in Barcelona.[156]HisClub Español building[es](1912) features one of the largest stained glass windows in Latin America produced (as well as tiling and ceramics) by the local firm Buxadera, Fornells y Cía.[157]The sculptor of the building is Diego Masana from Barcelona.[157]
Belgian influence on Argentinian Art Nouveau is represented by the Villa Ortiz Basualdo, now hosting theJuan Carlos Castagnino Municipal Museum of ArtinMar del Platawhere the furniture, interiors, and lighting are byGustave Serrurier-Bovy.

## Art Nouveau in the rest of the world
As in Argentina, Art Nouveau in other countries was mostly influenced by foreign artists:
Art Nouveau motifs can also be found inFrench Colonialartchitechture throughoutFrench Indochina.
A notable art movement calledBezalel schoolappeared in thePalestine regionin dating to the late Ottoman andBritish Mandateperiods. It has been described as "a fusion oforiental artand Jugendstil."[168]Several artists associated with the Bezalel school were noted for their Art Nouveau style, includingZe'ev Raban,Ephraim Moses LilienandAbel Pann.[169]

## Characteristics, decoration and motifs
Early Art Nouveau, particularly in Belgium and France, was characterized by undulating, curving forms inspired by lilies, vines, flower stems and other natural forms, used in particular in the interiors ofVictor Hortaand the decoration ofLouis MajorelleandÉmile Gallé.[172]It also drew upon patterns based on butterflies and dragonflies, borrowed from Japanese art, which were popular in Europe at the time.[172]
Early Art Nouveau also often featured more stylised forms expressing movement, such as thecoup de fouetor "whiplash" line, depicted in the cyclamen plants drawn by designerHermann Obristin 1894. A description published inPanmagazine ofHermann Obrist's wall hangingCyclamen(1894), compared it to the "sudden violent curves generated by the crack of a whip,"[173]The term "whiplash", though it was originally used to ridicule the style, is frequently applied to the characteristic curves employed by Art Nouveau artists.[173]Such decorative undulating and flowing lines in a syncopated rhythm and asymmetrical shape, are often found in the architecture, painting, sculpture, and other forms of Art Nouveau design.[173]
Other floral forms were popular, inspired by lilies, wisteria and other flowers, particularly in the lamps ofLouis Comfort Tiffanyand the glass objects made by the artists of theSchool of NancyandÉmile Gallé. Other curving and undulating forms borrowed from nature included butterflies, peacocks, swans, and water lilies. Many designs depicted women's hair intertwined with stems of lilies, irises and other flowers.[174]Stylised floral forms were particularly used byVictor Hortain carpets, balustrades, windows, and furniture. They were also used extensively byHector Guimardfor balustrades, and, most famously, for the lamps and railings at the entrances of theParis Metro. Guimard explained: "That which must be avoided in everything that is continuous is the parallel and symmetry. Nature is the greatest builder and nature makes nothing that is parallel and nothing that is symmetrical."[175]
Earlier Art Nouveau furniture, such as that made byLouis MajorelleandHenry van de Velde, was characterized by the use of exotic and expensive materials, including mahogany with inlays of precious woods and trim, and curving forms without right angles. It gave a sensation of lightness.
In the second phase of Art Nouveau, following 1900, the decoration became purer and the lines were more stylised. The curving lines and forms evolved into polygons and then into cubes and other geometric forms. These geometric forms were used with particular effect in the architecture and furniture ofJoseph Maria Olbrich,Otto Wagner,Koloman MoserandJosef Hoffmann, especially theStoclet Palacein Brussels, which announced the arrival ofArt Decoandmodernism.[89][90][91]
Another characteristic of Art Nouveau architecture was the use of light, by opening up of interior spaces, by the removal of walls, and the extensive use of skylights to bring a maximum amount of light into the interior.Victor Horta's residence-studio and other houses built by him had extensive skylights, supported on curving iron frames. In theHotel Tasselhe removed the traditional walls around the stairway, so that the stairs became a central element of the interior design.

## Relationship with contemporary styles and movements
As an art style, Art Nouveau has affinities with thePre-Raphaelitesand theSymboliststyles, and artists likeAubrey Beardsley,Alphonse Mucha,Edward Burne-Jones,Gustav KlimtandJan Tooropcould be classed in more than one of these styles. Unlike Symbolist painting, however, Art Nouveau has a distinctive appearance; and, unlike theartisan-orientedArts and Crafts movement, Art Nouveau artists readily used new materials, machined surfaces, andabstractionin the service of pure design.
Art Nouveau did not eschew the use of machines, as the Arts and Crafts movement did. For sculpture, the principal materials employed were glass and wrought iron, resulting in sculptural qualities even in architecture. Ceramics were also employed in creating editions of sculptures by artists such asAuguste Rodin.[178]though his sculpture is not considered Art Nouveau.
Art Nouveau architecture made use of manytechnologicalinnovations of the late 19th century, especially the use of exposed iron and large, irregularly shaped pieces of glass for architecture.
Art Nouveau tendencies were also absorbed into local styles. In Denmark, for example, it was one aspect ofSkønvirke('Aesthetic work'), which itself more closely relates to theArts and Crafts style.[179][180]Likewise, artists adopted many of the floral and organic motifs of Art Nouveau into theMłoda Polska('Young Poland') style in Poland.[181]Młoda Polska, however, was also inclusive of other artistic styles and encompassed a broader approach to art, literature, and lifestyle.[182]
Architecturally, Art Nouveau has affinities with styles that, although modern, exist outside themodernisttradition established by architects likeWalter GropiusandLe Corbusier. It is particularly closely related toExpressionist architecture, which shares its preference for organic shapes, but grew out of an intellectual dissatisfaction with Art Nouveau's approach to ornamentation. As opposed to Art Nouveau's focus on plants and vegetal motifs, Expressionism takes inspiration from things like caves, mountains, lightning, crystal, and rock formations.[183]Another style conceived as a reaction to Art Nouveau wasArt Deco, which rejected organic surfaces altogether in preference for a rectilinear style derived from the contemporary artistic avant-garde.

## Genres
Art Nouveau is represented in painting andsculpture, but it is most prominent inarchitectureand thedecorative arts. It was well-suited to thegraphic arts, especially theposter,interior design, metal andglass art,jewellery,furniture design,ceramicsandtextiles.

## Posters and graphic art
The graphic arts flourished in the Art Nouveau period, thanks to new technologies of printing, particularly colourlithography, which allowed the mass production of colour posters. Art was no longer confined to galleries, museums and salons; it could be found on Paris walls, and in illustrated art magazines, which circulated throughout Europe and to the United States. The most popular theme of Art Nouveau posters was women; women symbolizing glamour, modernity and beauty, often surrounded by flowers.
In Britain, the leading graphic artist in the Art Nouveau style wasAubrey Beardsley(1872–1898). He began with engraved book illustrations forLe Morte d'Arthur, then black and white illustrations forSalomebyOscar Wilde(1893), which brought him fame. In the same year, he began engraving illustrations and posters for the art magazineThe Studio, which helped publicize European artists such asFernand Khnopffin Britain. The curving lines and intricate floral patterns attracted as much attention as the text.[184]
The Swiss-French artistEugène Grasset(1845–1917) was one of the first creators of French Art Nouveau posters. He helped decorate the cabaretLe Chat noirin 1885 and made his first posters for theFêtes de Paris. He made a celebrated poster ofSarah Bernhardtin 1890, and a wide variety of book illustrations. The artist-designersJules Chéret,Georges de Feureand the painterHenri de Toulouse-Lautrecall made posters for Paris theaters, cafés, dance halls cabarets. TheCzechartistAlphonse Mucha(1860–1939) arrived in Paris in 1888, and in 1895 made a poster for actress Sarah Bernhardt in the playGismondabyVictorien Sardou. The success of this poster led to a contract to produce posters for six more plays by Bernhardt. Over the next four years, he also designed sets, costumes, and even jewellery for the actress.[185][186]Based on the success of his theater posters, Mucha made posters for a variety of products, ranging from cigarettes and soap to beer biscuits, all featuring an idealized female figure with an hourglass figure. He went on to design products, from jewellery to biscuit boxes, in his distinctive style.[187]
In Vienna, the most prolific designer of graphics and posters wasKoloman Moser(1868–1918), who actively participated in the Secession movement withGustav KlimtandJosef Hoffmann, and made illustrations and covers for the magazine of the movement,Ver Sacrum, as well as paintings, furniture and decoration.[188]

## Painting
Painting was another domain of Art Nouveau, though most painters associated with Art Nouveau are primarily described as members of other movements, particularlyPost-Impressionismandsymbolism.Alphonse Muchawas famous for his Art Nouveau posters, which frustrated him. According to his son and biographer,Jiří Mucha, he did not think much of Art Nouveau. "What is it,Art Nouveau? he asked. "... Art can never be new."[189]He took the greatest pride in his work as a history painter. His Art Nouveau-inspired paintingSlavais a portrait of the daughter of his patron inSlaviccostume, which was modelled after his theatrical posters.[189]
The painters most closely associated with Art Nouveau wereLes Nabis, post-impressionist artists who were active in Paris from 1888 until 1900. One of their stated goals was to break down the barrier between the fine arts and the decorative arts. They painted not only canvases, but also decorative screens and panels. Many of their works were influenced by the aesthetics of Japanese prints. The members includedPierre Bonnard,Maurice Denis,Paul Ranson,Édouard Vuillard,Ker-Xavier Roussel,Félix Vallotton, andPaul Sérusier.[190]
The Austrian painter Gustav Klimt was an exponent of Art Nouveau painting, and more specifically a representative of the Modernist movement of the Viennese Secession. Klimt painted canvases and murals in an ornate personal style, which he also expressed through handicrafts, such as those found in the Viennese Secession Gallery. Klimt found one of his most recurring sources of inspiration in the female nude. His works are sensual, with a naturalistic, individual, organic style, inspired by nature following the decorative style of Gaudí.
The Catalan modernist painters (Ramón Casas, Santiago Rusiñol, Aleix Clapés, Joaquim Sunyer, Hermenegildo Anglada Camarasa, Juan Brull, Ricard Canals, Javier Gosé, Josep Maria Sert, Miguel Utrillo, etc.), closely connected with the avant-garde in Paris, and hugely influenced by Antoni Gaudí, had in the Els Quatre Gats tavern their meeting place. Pablo Picasso came out of the group.
Disciples of Anglada Camarasa were the Argentines Gregorio López Naguil, Tito Cittadini and Raúl Mazza who were responsible for carrying art nouveau painting to South America
In Belgium,Fernand Khnopffworked in both painting and graphic design. Wall murals by Gustav Klimt were integrated into decorative scheme ofJosef Hoffmannfor theStoclet Palace(1905–1911). The Klimt mural for the dining room at the Stoclet Palace is considered a masterpiece of late Art Nouveau.
One subject did appear both in traditional painting and Art Nouveau; the American dancerLoie Fuller, was portrayed by French and Austrian painters and poster artists.[44]
One particular style that became popular in the Art Nouveau period, especially in Brussels, wassgraffito, a technique invented in the Renaissance of applying layers of tinted plaster to make murals on the façades of houses. This was used in particular by Belgian architectPaul Hankarfor the houses he built for two artist friends, Paul Cauchie and Albert Ciamberlani.

## Glass art
Glass artwas a medium in which Art Nouveau found new and varied ways of expression. Intense amount of experimentation went on, particularly in France, to find new effects of transparency and opacity: in engraving win cameo, double layers, and acid engraving, a technique that permitted production in series. The city ofNancybecame an important centre for the French glass industry, and the workshops ofÉmile Galléand theDaumstudio, led byAugusteand Antonin Daum, were located there. They worked with many notable designers, includingErnest Bussière[fr],Henri Bergé (illustrateur)[fr], andAmalric Walter. They developed a new method of incrusting glass by pressing fragments of different coloured glass into the unfinished piece. They often collaborated with the furniture designerLouis Majorelle, whose home and workshops were in Nancy. Another feature of Art Nouveau was the use of stained glass windows with that style of floral themes in residential salons, particularly in the Art Nouveau houses in Nancy. Many were the work ofJacques Grüber, who made windows for theVilla Majorelleand other houses.[192]
In Belgium, the leading firm was the glass factory ofVal Saint Lambert, which created vases in organic and floral forms, many of them designed byPhilippe Wolfers. Wolfers was noted particularly for creating works ofsymbolistglass, often with metal decoration attached. InBohemia, then a region of theAustro-Hungarian Empirenoted for crystal manufacture, the companiesJ. & L. LobmeyrandJoh. Loetz Witwealso experimented with new colouring techniques, producing more vivid and richer colours. In Germany, experimentation was led by Karl Köpping, who used blown glass to create extremely delicate glasses in the form of flowers; so delicate that few survive today.[193]
In Vienna, the glass designs of the Secession movement were much more geometrical than those of France or Belgium;Otto Prutscherwas the most rigorous glass designer of the movement.[193]In Britain, a number of floral stained glass designs were created byMargaret Macdonald Mackintoshfor the architectural display calledThe House of an Art Lover.
In the United States,Louis Comfort Tiffanyand his designers became particularly famous for their lamps, whose glass shades used common floral themes intricately pieced together. Tiffany lamps gained popularity after theWorld's Columbian Expositionin Chicago in 1893, where Tiffany displayed his lamps in a Byzantine-like chapel. Tiffany experimented extensively with the processes of colouring glass, patenting in 1894 the processFavrile glass, which used metallic oxides to colour the interior of the molten glass, giving it an iridescent effect. His workshops produced several different series of theTiffany lampin different floral designs, along with stained glass windows, screens, vases and a range of decorative objects. His works were first imported to Germany, then to France bySiegfried Bing, and then became one of the decorative sensations of the 1900 Exposition. An American rival to Tiffany,Steuben Glass, was founded in 1903 inCorning, N.Y., byFrederick Carder, who, like Tiffany, used the Fevrile process to create surfaces with iridescent colours. Another notable American glass artist wasJohn La Farge, who created intricate and colourful stained glass windows on both religious and purely decorative themes.[193]
Examples of stained glass windows in churches can be found in theArt Nouveau religious buildingsarticle.

## Metal art
The 19th-century architectural theoristViollet-le-Duchad advocated showing, rather than concealing the iron frameworks of modern buildings, but Art Nouveau architectsVictor HortaandHector Guimardwent a step further: they added iron decoration in curves inspired by floral and vegetal forms both in the interiors and exteriors of their buildings. They took the form of stairway railings in the interior, light fixtures, and other details in the interior, and balconies and other ornaments on the exterior. These became some of the most distinctive features of Art Nouveau architecture. The use of metal decoration in vegetal forms soon also appeared in silverware, lamps, and other decorative items.[194]
In the United States, the designerGeorge Grant Elmsliemade extremely intricate cast iron designs for the balustrades and other interior decoration of the buildings of Chicago architectLouis Sullivan.
While French and American designers used floral and vegetal forms,Joseph Maria Olbrichand the other Secession artists designed teapots and other metal objects in a more geometric and sober style.[195]

## Jewellery
Art Nouveau jewellery's characteristics include subtle curves and lines. Its design often features natural objects including flowers, animals or birds. The female body is also popular often appearing oncameos. It frequently included long necklaces made of pearls or sterling-silver chains punctuated by glass beads or ending in a silver or gold pendant, itself often designed as an ornament to hold a single, faceted jewel ofamethyst,peridot, orcitrine.[196]
Art Nouveau jewellery is distinguished by its extensive use of detailed, symbolic motifs that embody the movement's deep connection to nature and mythology. Predominant motifs include the ethereal forms of dragonflies and peacocks, which symbolise transformation and beauty, and the detailed depictions of plants and flowers, highlighting nature's cyclicality and growth. Intricately designed insects like butterflies and scarabs, often rendered with meticulous enamelling, add a layer of mysticism, symbolising rebirth and protection. This style also frequently featured sinuous figures of women, suggesting sensuality and the connection to the earth. More ominous figures such as snakes and mythical creatures like Medusas and chimeras were used to evoke the darker aspects of the natural and mythical worlds. The use of these motifs was not merely for embellishment; each was imbued with meanings, reflecting Art Nouveau's philosophy of integrating art, nature, and spiritual symbolism.[197]
The Art Nouveau period brought a notable stylistic revolution to the jewellery industry, led largely by the major firms in Paris. For the previous two centuries, the emphasis in fine jewellery had been creating dramatic settings for diamonds. During the reign of Art Nouveau, diamonds usually played a supporting role. Jewellers experimented with a wide variety of other stones, includingagate,garnet,opal,moonstone,aquamarineand other semi-precious stones, and with a wide variety of new techniques, among othersenamelling, and new materials, includinghorn, moulded glass, andivory. These materials allowed them to create organic forms and intricate details, highlighting the era's departure from traditional jewellery design towards more artistic and expressive creations. Techniques like plique-à-jour enamelling were employed to achieve translucent effects akin to stained glass, adding depth and luminosity to their pieces.[198]
Early notable Paris jewellers in the Art Nouveau style includedLouis Aucoc, whose family jewellery firm dated to 1821. The most famous designer of the Art Nouveau period,René Lalique, served his apprenticeship in the Aucoc studio from 1874 to 1876. Lalique became a central figure of Art Nouveau jewellery and glass, using nature, fromdragonfliesto grasses, as his models. Artists from outside of the traditional world of jewellery, such asPaul Follot, best known as a furniture designer, experimented with jewellery designs. Other notable French Art Nouveau jewellery designers includedJules Brateauand Georges Henry. In the United States, the most famous designer wasLouis Comfort Tiffany, whose work was shown at the shop ofSiegfried Bingand also at the 1900 Paris Exposition. Siegfried Bing's Paris gallery,Maison de l'Art Nouveau, played a pivotal role in promoting Art Nouveau jewellery. By showcasing works from avant-garde jewellers like René Lalique,Henri Vever, andEdward Colonna, Bing elevated jewellery to the status of fine art and fostered international appreciation for the style.[198]
In Britain, the most prominent figure was the Liberty & Co. & Cymric designerArchibald Knox, who made a variety of Art Nouveau pieces, including silver belt buckles.C. R. Ashbeedesigned pendants in the shapes of peacocks. The versatileGlasgowdesignerCharles Rennie Mackintoshalso made jewellery, using traditional Celtic symbols. In Germany, the centre forJugendstiljewellery was the city ofPforzheim, where most of the German firms, includingTheodor Fahrner, were located. They quickly produced works to meet the demand for the new style.[196]

## Architecture and ornamentation
Art Nouveau architecture was a reaction against the eclectic styles that dominated European architecture in the second half of the 19th century. It was expressed through decoration: eitherornamental(based on flowers and plants, e.g. thistles,[199]irises,[200]cyclamens, orchids, water lilies etc.) or sculptural (see therespective sectionbelow). While faces of people (ormascarons) are referred to ornament, the use of people in different forms of sculpture (statues and reliefs: see therespective sectionbelow) was also common in some forms of Art Nouveau. BeforeVienna Secession, Jugendstil and the various forms of theNational romantic stylefaçades were asymmetrical, and often decorated with polychrome ceramic tiles. The decoration usually suggested movement; there was no distinction between the structure and the ornament.[201]A curling or"whiplash"motif, based on the forms of plants and flowers, was widely used in the early Art Nouveau, but decoration became more abstract and symmetrical inVienna Secessionand other later versions of the style, as in theStoclet Palacein Brussels (1905–1911).[202]
The style first appeared in Brussels'Hankar HousebyPaul Hankar(1893) andHôtel Tassel(1892–93) ofVictor Horta. The Hôtel Tassel was visited byHector Guimard, who used the same style in his first major work, theCastel Béranger(1897–98). Horta and Guimard also designed the furniture and the interior decoration, down to the doorknobs and carpeting. In 1899, based on the fame of the Castel Béranger, Guimard received a commission to design theentrances of the stationsof the newParis Métro, which opened in 1900. Though few of the originals survived, these became the symbol of the Art Nouveau movement in Paris.
In Paris, the architectural style was also a reaction to the strict regulations imposed on building façades byGeorges-Eugène Haussmann, the prefect of Paris underNapoleon III.Bow windowswere finally allowed in 1903, and Art Nouveau architects went to the opposite extreme, most notably in the houses ofJules Lavirotte, which were essentially large works of sculpture, completely covered with decoration. An important neighbourhood of Art Nouveau houses appeared in the French city ofNancy, around theVilla Majorelle(1901–02), the residence of the furniture designerLouis Majorelle. It was designed byHenri Sauvageas a showcase for Majorelle's furniture designs.[201]
Many Art Nouveau buildings were included inUNESCO World Cultural Heritagelist as a part of their city centres (inBern,Budapest,Lviv, Paris,Porto,Prague,Riga,Saint Petersburg,Strasbourg(Neustadt),Vienna). Along with them, there were buildings that were included in the list as separate objects:

## Sculpture
Sculpture was another form of expression for Art Nouveau artists, crossing with ceramics sometimes. The porcelain figurineDancer with a ScarfbyAgathon Léonardwon recognition both in ceramics and in sculpture at theParis Expositionin 1900. Sculptors of other countries also created ceramic sculptures: BohemianStanislav SuchardaandLadislav Šaloun, BelgianCharles Van der Stappenand CatalanLambert Escaler[ca], who created statues of polychrome terracotta. Another notable sculptor of that time wasAgustí Querol SubiratsfromCataloniawho created statues in Spain, Mexico,Argentina, andCuba.[204]
Inarchitectural sculpturenot only statues but also reliefs were used. Art Nouveau architects and sculptors found inspiration in animalmotifs(butterflies,[205]peacocks,[206]swans,[207]owls,[208]bats,[209]dragons,[210]bears[211]).Atlantes,[212]caryatids,[213]putti,[214]andgargoyles[215]were also used.

## Furniture
Furniture design in the Art Nouveau period was closely associated with the architecture of the buildings; the architects often designed the furniture, carpets, light fixtures, doorknobs, and other decorative details. The furniture was often complex and expensive; a fine finish, usually polished or varnished, was regarded as essential, and continental designs were usually very complex, with curving shapes that were expensive to make. It also had the drawback that the owner of the home could not change the furniture or add pieces in a different style without disrupting the entire effect of the room. For this reason, when Art Nouveau architecture went out of style, the style of furniture also largely disappeared.
In France, the centre for furniture design and manufacture was inNancy, where two major designers,Émile GalléandLouis Majorellehad their studios and workshops, and where theAlliance des industries d'art(later called the School of Nancy) had been founded in 1901. Both designers based on their structure and ornamentation on forms taken from nature, including flowers and insects, such as the dragonfly, a popular motif in Art Nouveau design. Gallé was particularly known for his use ofmarquetryin relief, in the form of landscapes or poetic themes. Majorelle was known for his use of exotic and expensive woods, and for attaching bronze sculpted in vegetal themes to his pieces of furniture. Both designers used machines for the first phases of manufacture, but all the pieces were finished by hand. Other notable furniture designers of the Nancy School includedEugène VallinandÉmile André; both were architects by training, and both designed furniture that resembled the furniture from Belgian designers such as Horta and Van de Velde, which had less decoration and followed more closely the curving plants and flowers.
Other notable French designers includedHenri Bellery-Desfontaines, who took his inspiration from the neo-Gothic styles ofViollet-le-Duc; andGeorges de Feure,Eugène Gaillard, andÉdouard Colonna, who worked together with art dealerSiegfried Bingto revitalize the French furniture industry with new themes. Their work was known for "abstract naturalism", its unity of straight and curved lines, and itsrococoinfluence. The furniture of de Feure at the Bing pavilion won a gold medal at the 1900 Paris Exposition. The most unusual and picturesque French designer wasFrançois-Rupert Carabin, a sculptor by training, whose furniture featured sculpted nude female forms and symbolic animals, particularly cats, who combined Art Nouveau elements withSymbolism. Other influential Paris furniture designers wereCharles Plumet, andAlexandre Charpentier.[216]In many ways the old vocabulary and techniques of classic French 18th-centuryRococofurniture were re-interpreted in a new style.[10]
In Belgium, the pioneer architects of theArt Nouveau movement,Victor HortaandHenry van de Velde, designed furniture for their houses, using vigorous curving lines and a minimum of decoration. The Belgian designerGustave Serrurier-Bovyadded more decoration, applying brass strips in curving forms. In the Netherlands, where the style was calledNieuwe Kunstor New Art, H. P. Berlag, Lion Cachet and Theodor Nieuwenhuis followed a different course, that of the EnglishArts and Crafts movement, with more geometric rational forms.
In Britain, the furniture ofCharles Rennie Mackintoshwas purely Arts and Crafts, austere and geometrical, with long straight lines and right angles and a minimum of decoration.[217]Continental designs were much more elaborate, often using curved shapes both in the basic shapes of the piece, and in applied decorative motifs. In Germany, the furniture ofPeter Behrensand theJugendstilwas largely rationalist, with geometric straight lines and some decoration attached to the surface. Their goal was exactly the opposite of French Art Nouveau; simplicity of structure and simplicity of materials, for furniture that could be inexpensive and easily mass-manufactured. The same was true for the furniture of designers of theWiener Werkstättein Vienna, led byOtto Wagner,Josef Hoffmann, Josef Maria Olbrich andKoloman Moser. The furniture was geometric and had a minimum of decoration, though in style it often followed national historic precedent, particularly theBiedemeierstyle.[218]
Italian and Spanish furniture design went off in their own direction.Carlo Bugattiin Italy designed the extraordinary Snail Chair, wood covered with painted parchment and copper, for the Turin International Exposition of 1902. In Spain, following the lead ofAntoni Gaudíand theModernismomovement, the furniture designer Gaspar Homar designed works that were inspired by natural forms with touches of Catalan historic styles.[136]
In the United States, furniture design was more often inspired by the Arts and Crafts movement, or by historic American models, than by the Art Nouveau. One designer who did introduce Art Nouveau themes wasCharles RohlfsinBuffalo, N.Y., whose designs for American white oak furniture were influenced by motifs ofCeltic artandGothic art, with touches of Art Nouveau in the metal trim applied to the pieces.[136]

## Ceramics
Ceramic art, includingfaience, was another flourishing domain for Art Nouveau artists, in the English-speaking countries falling under the widerart potterymovement. The last part of the 19th century saw many technological innovations in the manufacture of ceramics, particularly the development of high temperature (grand feu) ceramics with crystallised and matte glazes. At the same time, several lost techniques, such assang de boeuf glaze, were rediscovered. Art Nouveau ceramics were also influenced by traditional and modern Japanese and Chinese ceramics, whose vegetal and floral motifs fitted well with the Art Nouveau style. In France, artists also rediscovered the traditionalstoneware(grés) methods and reinvented them with new motifs.[223]
Émile Gallé, in Nancy, created earthenware works in natural earth colors with naturalistic themes of plants and insects. Ceramics also found an important new use in architecture: Art Nouveau architects,Jules LavirotteandHector Guimardamong them, began to decorate the façades of buildings witharchitectural ceramics, many of them made by the firm ofAlexandre Bigot, giving them a distinct Art Nouveau sculptural look.[223]
One of the pioneer French Art Nouveau ceramists wasErnest Chaplet, whose career in ceramics spanned thirty years. He began producing stoneware influenced by Japanese and Chinese prototypes. Beginning in 1886, he worked with painterPaul Gauguinon stoneware designs with applied figures, multiple handles, painted and partially glazed, and collaborated with sculptorsFélix Bracquemond,Jules DalouandAuguste Rodin. His works were acclaimed at the 1900 Exposition.
The major national ceramics firms had an important place at the 1900 Paris Exposition: theManufacture nationale de Sèvresoutside Paris;Nymphenburg,Meissen,Villeroy & Bochin Germany, andDoultonin Britain. Other leading French ceramists includedTaxile Doat,Pierre-Adrien Dalpayrat,Edmond Lachenal,Albert Dammouse[fr]andAuguste Delaherche.[224]
In France, Art Nouveau ceramics sometimes crossed the line into sculpture. The porcelain figurineDancer with a ScarfbyAgathon Léonard, made for theManufacture nationale de Sèvres, won recognition in both categories at the 1900 Paris Exposition.
TheZsolnay factoryinPécs, Hungary, was founded byMiklós Zsolnay(1800–1880) in 1853 and led by his son,Vilmos Zsolnay(1828–1900) with chief designerTádé Sikorski(1852–1940) to produce stoneware and other ceramics. In 1893, Zsolnay introduced porcelain pieces made ofeosin. He led the factory to worldwide recognition by demonstrating its innovative products at world fairs and international exhibitions, including the1873 World Fair in Vienna, then at the1878 World Fair in Paris, where Zsolnay received aGrand Prix. Frost-resisting Zsolnay building decorations were used in numerous buildings, specifically during the Art Nouveau movement.[225]
Ceramic tiles were also a distinctive feature of PortugueseArte Novathat continued the longazulejotradition of the country.

## Mosaics
Mosaics were used by many Art Nouveau artists of different movements, especially of CatalanModernisme(Hospital de Sant Pau,Palau de la Música Catalana,Casa Lleó-Moreraand many others).Antoni Gaudíinvented a new technique in the treatment of materials calledtrencadís, which used waste ceramic pieces.
ColourfulMaiolicatile in floral designs were a distinctive feature of theMajolica Housein Vienna byOtto Wagner, (1898) and of the buildings of the works of the RussianAbramtsevo Colony, especially those byMikhail Vrubel.

## Textiles and wallpaper
Textiles and wallpapers were an important vehicle of Art Nouveau from the beginning of the style, and an essential element of Art Nouveau interior design. In Britain, the textile designs ofWilliam Morrishad helped launch theArts and Crafts movementand then Art Nouveau. Many designs were created for theLibertydepartment store in London, which popularized the style throughout Europe. One such designer was theSilver Studio, which provided colourful stylised floral patterns. Other distinctive designs came fromGlasgow School, andMargaret Macdonald Mackintosh. The Glasgow school introduced several distinctive motifs, including stylised eggs, geometric forms and the "Rose of Glasgow".
In France, a major contribution was made by designerEugène Grassetwho in 1896 publishedLa Plante et ses applications ornamentales, suggesting Art Nouveau designs based on different flowers and plants. Many patterns were designed for and produced by for the major French textile manufacturers in Mulhouse, Lille and Lyon, by German and Belgian workshops. The German designerHermann Obristspecialized in floral patterns, particularly the cyclamen and the "whiplash" style based on flower stems, which became a major motif of the style. The BelgianHenry van de Veldepresented a textile work,La Veillée d'Anges, at the SalonLa Libre Esthéthiquein Brussels, inspired by the symbolism ofPaul Gauguinand of theNabis. In the Netherlands, textiles were often inspired bybatikpatterns from the Dutch colonies in theEast Indies. Folk art also inspired the creation of tapestries, carpets, embroidery and textiles in Central Europe and Scandinavia, in the work ofGerhard MuntheandFrida Hansenin Norway. TheFive Swansdesign ofOtto Eckmannappeared in more than one hundred different versions. The Hungarian designerJános Vaszarycombined Art Nouveau elements with folkloric themes.[227]

## Museums
There are 4 types of museums featuring Art Nouveau heritage:
There are many other Art Nouveau buildings and structures that do not have museum status but can be officially visited for a fee or unofficially for free (e.g. railway stations, churches, cafes, restaurants, pubs, hotels, stores, offices, libraries, cemeteries, fountains as well as numerous apartment buildings that are still inhabited).

## Posterity
Criticized for "its primitive extravagances", Art Nouveau started to fade away after 1911.[231]In histories of European architecture in the 20th century, from the 1930s to the 1950s, influential historians, likeNikolaus Pevsner,Sigfried GiedionandHenry-Russell Hitchcock, did not take Art Nouveau into consideration. This left the first versions of Pevsner'sThe Genius of European Architecturewithout a mention ofHector GuimardorAntoni Gaudí. The first major works dealing with Art Nouveau were published at the end of the 1950s, withJohnny Watser.

## Influence on Art Deco
Art Nouveau was one of the factors that led toArt Deco, a style created as a collective effort of multiple French designers to create a new modern style around 1910. This is because Art Nouveau broke the supremacy of 19th-centuryrevivalismandeclecticism, opposing academic conventions. Through its various manifestations, it invented new ornamental systems, no longer dependent on historical formulae, through curvy plant forms in most of the world, geometric decoration inAustria-Hungaryand the UK, and reinterpretations of national tradition in the countries ofNorthern,CentralandEastern Europe. The idea of creating a new style, with new ornaments and shapes, was a significant contribution that Art Nouveau brought to the invention of Art Deco. Another aspect taken from Art Nouveau is the emphasis put on domestic luxury.
Some of the fine details and sinuous lines of Art Nouveau are also found in Art Deco architecture and design of the 1920s, but slightly simplified. Similarly, the flat colours and visible outlines popularized by Art Nouveau posters are very often used in Art Deco illustration. Compared to many Art Nouveau designs, where the vegetal motifs seem to grow and morph on the object or architectural ornament, most Art Deco works have a clear compositional structure, similar toNeoclassicism.
Aside from ideas taken from Franco-Belgian Art Nouveau, influence came also from the geometric motifs and volumes found in the UK and Vienna. The flowers, spirals and squares found here are very similar to the ones found in Art Deco.Charles Rennie Mackintosheven anticipated Art Deco forms in his later creations. One of theSecessionistworks that best anticipates the style is theStoclet PalaceinBrussels, with itsziggurat-shaped setbacks, the vertical slit of the staircase window, and the overall simplicity and modest ornamentation.[237]

## Revivals
During the 1960s,postmodernismwas born. This was and is a movement that questionsmodernism(thestatus quoafterWorld War II), and promoted the inclusion and reinterpretation of elements of historic styles in new designs. Although several international exhibitions on Art Nouveau happened in the 1950s, a successful revival appeared in the 1960s, and especially in the 1970s with the rise of postmodernism. Aside from exhibitions, this revival might be connected with the "flower power" generation that set the tone at the time recognized its own life ideals in the floral ornament and the erotically "emancipated" art themes of the years around 1900.
Art Nouveau was also one of the main sources of inspiration for manypostersofpsychedelic rockfrom the same period. Leading proponents of the 1960s psychedelic art movement wereSan Franciscoposter artists such asRick Griffin,Victor Moscoso,Bonnie MacLean,Stanley Mouse,Alton Kelley, andWes Wilson. Compared to the earthy colours that characterize Art Nouveau, these posters had highly saturated colours put in contrast, and also highly stylised text, sometimes hard to read. This style flourished from about 1966 to 1972.
Gustav Klimt's iconic paintings are found today on many kitschy souvenirs: mugs, plates, napkins, key chains, and so on.The Kisshas been printed on countless sizes and materials. In a similar situation areAlphonse Mucha's posters.
One of the artists who found in Art Nouveau a major source of inspiration was the Austrian painter and architectFriedensreich Hundertwasser. He took inspiration from multiple sources, includingEgon Schiele,BaroqueandPersianminiature, and the curvy ornamentation of Art Nouveau.[239]