## Aztec mythology
Aztec mythologyis the body or collection of myths of theAzteccivilization of Central Mexico.[1]The Aztecs were a culture living in central Mexico and much of their mythology is similar to that of otherMesoamericancultures.  According to legend, the various groups who became the Aztecs arrived from the North into theAnahuac valleyaroundLake Texcoco. The location of this valley and lake of destination is clear – it is the heart of modernMexico City– but little can be known with certainty about the origin of the Aztec.  There are different accounts of their origin. In the myth, the ancestors of the Mexica/Aztec were one of seven groups that came from a place in the north calledAztlan, to make the journey southward, hence their name "Azteca." Other accounts cite their origin inChicomoztoc, "the place of the seven caves", or atTamoanchan(the legendary origin of all civilizations).
The Mexica/Aztec were said to be guided by their war-god Huitzilopochtli, to an island inLake Texcoco, they saw aneagle, perched on anopalcactus, holding arattlesnakein its talons. This vision fulfilled a prophecy telling them that they should found their new home on that spot. The Aztecs built their city ofTenochtitlanon that site, building a greatartificial island, which today is in the center ofMexico City. This legendary vision is pictured on theCoat of Arms of Mexico.

## Creation myth
According to legend, when the Mexica arrived in the Anahuac valley aroundLake Texcoco, they were considered by the other groups as the least civilized of all, but the Mexica decided to learn... and they took in all that they could from the other people, especially from the ancientToltec(whom they seem to have partially confused with the more ancient civilization ofTeotihuacan). To the Aztec, the Toltec were the originators of all culture; "Toltecayotl" was a synonym for culture. Aztec legends identify the Toltecs and the cult ofQuetzalcoatlwith the legendary city ofTollan, which they also identified with the more ancient Teotihuacan.
Because the Aztecs adopted and combined several traditions with their own earlier traditions, they had severalcreation myths. One of these, theFive Suns, describes four great ages preceding the present world, each of which ended in a catastrophe, and "were named in function of the force or divine element that violently put an end to each one of them".[2]Coatlicuewas the mother ofCentzon Huitznahua("Four Hundred Southerners"), her sons, andCoyolxauhqui, her daughter. At some point, she found a ball of feathers and placed it in her waistband, thus becoming pregnant withHuitzilopochtli. Her other children became suspicious as to the identity of the father, and vowed to kill their mother. She gave birth on Mount Coatepec, pursued by her children, but the newborn Huitzilopochtli (born fully armed and prepared to fight) defeated most of his brothers, who then became the stars. He also killed his half-sister,Coyolxauhqui, by tearing out her heart usingXiuhcoatl(a blue snake) and throwing her body down the mountain. This was said to inspire the Aztecs to rip the hearts out of their human sacrifices and throw their bodies down the sides of the temple dedicated to Huitzilopochtli, who represents the sun,  chasing away the stars at dawn.
Our age (Nahui-Ollin), thefifth age, or fifth creation, began in the ancient city of Teotihuacan.[3]According to the myth, all the gods had gathered to sacrifice themselves and create a new age. Although the world and the sun had already been created, it would only be through their sacrifice that the sun would be set into motion, and time and history could begin. The strongest and most handsome of the gods,Tecuciztecatl, was supposed to sacrifice himself but when it came time to self-immolate, he could not jump into the fire. Instead,Nanahuatlthe smallest and humblest of the gods, who was also covered in boils, sacrificed himself first, and jumped into the flames. The sun was set into motion with his sacrifice, and time began. Humiliated by Nanahuatl's sacrifice, Tecuciztecatl, too, leaped into the fire and became the moon.[4]

## Pantheon
Since Aztec deities have several properties, scholars have difficulties identifying the image of each divinity.[5]
In fact, the pictual construction of deities is based upon the combination of icons, each of which symbolizes meanings, rather than having one particular style of the deity.[6]Despite having various ways to combine icons, each deity has a certain homogeneous meaning when observed entirely.[7]Thus, analysis of elements of each deity helps identification of divine  personalities. In addition, the elements of each devinity represent the content of the concept that the deity is responsible for.[8]