## Billboard charts
TheBillboardchartstabulate the relative weekly popularity of songs and albums in the United States and globally. The results are published inBillboardmagazine.Billboardbiz, the online extension of theBillboardcharts, provides additional weekly charts,[1]as well as year-end charts.[2]The three most important charts are theBillboardGlobal 200for songs globally, theBillboardHot 100for songs in the United States of America and theBillboard200for albums in the United States of America, and other charts may be dedicated to a specific genre such as R&B, country, or rock, or they may cover all genres. The charts can be ranked according to sales, streams, or airplay, and for main song charts such as theHot 100orGlobal 200(though the latter globally) song chart, all three data are used to compile the charts.[3]For theBillboard200album chart, streams and track sales are included in addition toalbum sales.[4]
The weekly sales and streams charts have been monitored on a Friday-to-Thursday cycle since July 2015; previously it was on a Monday-to-Sunday cycle. Radio airplay song charts, however, follow the Monday-to-Sunday cycle (previously Wednesday-to-Tuesday).[5]The charts are released each Tuesday with an issue date the following Saturday.[citation needed]

## History
The first chart published byBillboardwas "Last Week's Ten Best Sellers Among The Popular Songs", a list of best-sellingsheet music, in July 1913. Other early charts listed popular song performances in theatres and recitals in different cities. In 1928, "Popular Numbers Featured by Famous Singers and Leaders" appeared, which added radio performances to in-person performances.[6]On January 4, 1936,Billboardmagazine published its first pop chart based on record sales.[7]Titled "Ten Best Records for Week Ending", it listed the 10 top-selling records of three leading record companies as reported by the companies themselves. In March 1937, the "Songs with the Most Radio Plugs" chart debuted with data from a separate company. In October 1938, a review list, "The Week's Best Records", was retitled "The Billboard Record Buying Guide" by incorporating airplay and sheet music sales, which would eventually become the first trade survey of record popularity.[6]
In the July 27, 1940, issue, the first "Billboard Music Popularity Chart" was published for the week ending July 20,[8][9]with separate listings covering retail sales, sheet music sales,jukeboxsong selection and radio play. Among the lists were the 10 songs of the "Best Selling Retail Records", which is the fore-runner of today's pop chart, with "I'll Never Smile Again" byTommy Dorsey(featuring vocals byFrank Sinatra) its first number one.[6][9]This best-seller chart (also known as "Best Sellers in Stores" and "Best Selling Pop Singles in Stores") is considered the true guide to a song's popularity until the creation of the Hot 100 in 1958.[10]Another accolade of a successful song was a position on the "Honor Roll of Hits", introduced on March 24, 1945, initially as a 10-song list,[11]later expanded to 30 songs, which ranked the most popular songs by combining record and sheet sales, disk jockey, and jukebox performances as determined byBillboard'sweekly nationwide survey.[12]This chart amalgamated different records of the same song by different performers as one, and topping the first chart was "Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive".
In  November 1955, a composite standing chart that combined retail sales, jukebox and disk jockeys play charts but counted individual records separately was created as "The Top 100" chart, with "Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing" byThe Four Acesits first No. 1.[6]This chart is the direct predecessor to the current Hot 100 chart.  The jukebox chart ceased publication after the June 17, 1957, issue, the disk jockey chart after July 28, 1958, and the best-seller chart after October 13, 1958.[13]After July 28, 1958, the composite chart the "Top 100" chart was also discontinued;[14]and the "Hot 100" began the following week on August 4, 1958, listing "Poor Little Fool" byRicky Nelsonas its first No. 1.[15][16]The methodology for compiling the chart has changed over the years, currently the Hot 100 combinessinglessales, radioairplay,digital downloads, andstreamingactivity (including data fromYouTubeand other video sites). ManyBillboardcharts use this basic formula apart from charts dedicated to the three data sources: sales (both physical and digital), airplay and streaming.[17]
In the early period, the issue dates and the chart dates given inBillboardwere different until January 13, 1962, when the issue dates and the chart dates both referred to theweek endingdates.[10]The Honor Roll of Hits chart was discontinued after November 16, 1963.[13]
Billboard also publishes various music genre charts. "Harlem Hit Parade" was created in 1943 which became "Best-Selling Race Records" in 1948 and "Best-selling Rhythm & Blues Records" in 1949, and then "Soul Singles" in 1969 (currentlyHot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs). "Best-selling Folk Records" was published in 1948, and this morphed into "Best-Selling Country & Western Records" in 1949, "Best-Selling C&W Records" in 1956 and "Hot Country Singles" in 1963 (nowHot Country Songs). MOR charts has been published since 1961, variously called "Easy Listening", "Middle-Road Singles" and "Pop-Standard Singles" and nowAdult Contemporary.[6]Billboardcharts now cover these music genres:rock, pop,country,dance,bluegrass,jazz,classical,R&B,rap,electronic,Latin,Christian,worldandholiday music, and evenringtonesfor mobile (cell) phones.
An album chart, the "Best Selling Popular Record Albums", was first published on March 24, 1945, withThe King Cole Trioits first No. 1.[18]The first chart had 10 albums, before reducing to five in the following weeks, then increasing again to 10 in 1948. The album chart was split into 33-8 and 45 rpm lists in 1950 before they recombined in 1954, then divided into mono and stereo classifications in 1959 before they merged into a 150-item pop album chart in 1963. It was eventually expanded into a 200 album list on May 13, 1967.[6]Various genre album charts were also published: Country LP chart in January 1964, R&B chart in 1965, jazz in 1969, Latin in 1973, Gospel 1974,[6]andRockin 1981. Other charts include Classical albums, Comedy Albums, Holiday Albums, Soundtracks, Independent Albums,Catalog Albumand many others besides.
At the end of each year,Billboardtallies the results of all of its charts, and the results are published in a year-end issue and heard on year-end editions of itsAmerican Top 40andAmerican Country Countdownradio broadcasts.[19]The first suchannual chartsreleased were for the year 1946, published in the January 4, 1947, issue,[20]although annual listing of songs had been published some years prior,[21]such as the undifferentiated annual chart based on "Honor Roll of Hits" for 1945.[22]Between 1991 and 2006, the top single/album/artist(s) in each of those charts was/were awarded in the form of the annualBillboard Music Awards, which were held in December until the awards went dormant in 2007. The awards returned in May 2011.[23]

## Chart compilation methodology
For many years, a song had to be commercially available as a single to be considered for any of theBillboardcharts. At the time, instead of usingLuminate(formerlyNielsen SoundScanorNielsen Broadcast Data Systems, BDS),Billboardobtained its data from manual reports filled out by radio stations and stores. For different musical genres, which stations and stores are used separates the charts; each musical genre has a core audience or retail group. Each genre's department atBillboardis headed up by a chart manager, who makes these determinations.[citation needed]According to the 100th-anniversary issue ofBillboard, prior to the official implementation of SoundScan tracking in November 1991, many radio stations and retail stores removed songs from their manual reports after the associated record labels stopped promoting a particular single. Thus, songs fell quickly after peaking and had shorter chart lives.  In 1990, thecountrysingles chart was the first chart to use SoundScan and BDS.[24]They were followed by the Hot 100 and theR&Bchart in 1991.[25]Today, all of theBillboardcharts use this technology.[citation needed]
Before September 1995, singles were allowed to chart in the week they first went on sale based on airplay points alone. The policy was changed in September 1995, to only allow a single to debut after a full week of sales on combined sales and airplay points. This allowed several tracks to debut at number one.[citation needed]
In December 1998, the policy was further modified to allow tracks to chart on the basis of airplay alone without a commercial release.  This change was made to reflect the changing realities of the music business. Previous to this, several substantial radio and MTV hits had not appeared on theBillboardchart at all, because manymajor labelschose not to release them as standalone singles, hoping their unavailability would spur greateralbum sales. Not offering a popular song to the public as a single was unheard of before the 1970s. The genres that suffered most at the time were those that increasingly impactedpop culture, including new genres such astrip hopandgrunge. Among the many pre-1999 songs that had ended up in this Hot 100 limbo wereThe Cardigans' "Lovefool",Natalie Imbruglia's "Torn" (which peaked at 42),Goo Goo Dolls' "Iris" (which hit number 9),OMC's "How Bizarre",Sugar Ray's "Fly", andNo Doubt's "Don't Speak".[citation needed]
On June 25, 2015,Billboardmade changes in its chart requirements. The official street date for all new album releases was moved from Tuesday to Friday in the United States.  For all sales-based charts (ranking both albums and tracks),Billboardand Nielsen changed the chart reporting period to cover the first seven days of an album's release. As a result of the changes, TheBillboard200, top albums sales, genre-based albums, digital songs, genre-based downloads, streaming songs, and genre-focused streaming surveys ran on a Friday-to-Thursday cycle.  Radio Songs, which informs the Hot 100, synced to the Monday-to-Sunday period after formerly covering Wednesday to Tuesday. All other radio charts and genre tallies followed the Monday-to-Sunday cycle. The move was made to coincide with theIFPI'smove to have all singles and albums released globally on Fridays.[5]

## Incorporation of digital platforms
Starting on February 12, 2005,Billboardchanged its methodology to include paiddigital downloadsfrom digital music retailers such asRhapsody, AmazonMP3, andiTunes. With this policy change, a song could chart based on digital downloads alone.[26]
On July 31, 2007,Billboardchanged its methodology for the Hot 100 chart to include digital streams, which at the time was obtained fromYahooand AOL's streaming platforms. This change was made exclusively to theBillboardHot 100chart. The effect of this chart change was minuscule at the time because it was estimated to account for 5% of the chart's total points.[27]
In October 2012,Billboardsignificantly changed the methodology for its country, rock, Latin, and rap charts, when it incorporated sales of digital downloads and streaming plays into what had previously been airplay-only charts. Another change was that rather than measuring airplay only from radio stations of a particular genre, the new methodology measures airplay from all radio formats.[28]This methodology was extended to their Christian and gospel charts in late 2013.[29]These methodology changes resulted in higher positions on the genre charts for songs with crossover appeal to other genres and radio formats (especially pop) at the expense of songs that appeal almost exclusively to core fans of the given genre, a change that proved controversial with those devotees.[30]
On February 20, 2013,Billboardannounced another change in the methodology for its charts that incorporatedYouTubevideo streaming data into the determination of ranking positions on streaming charts. The incorporation of YouTube streaming data enhanced a formula that includes on-demand audio streaming and online radio streaming. The YouTube video streams that used in this methodology are official video streams,Vevoon YouTube streams, and user-generated clips that use authorized audio.Billboardsaid this change was made to further reflect the divergent platforms of music consumption in today's world.[31]

## Discontinued charts
Notes

## Other charts
In December 2010,Billboardannounced a new chart titledSocial 50, which ranks the most active artists on the world's leading social networking sites. The Social 50 chart tallies artists' popularity using their weekly additions of friends/fans/followers, along with weekly artist page views and weekly song plays onMyspace,YouTube,Facebook,TwitterandiLike.[56]In January 2011,Billboardintroduced another chart calledUncharted, which lists new and developing artists, who are yet to appear on any majorBillboardchart, "...regardless of their country of origin."[57]
In May 2014, after the Korea K-Pop Hot 100 chart was discontinued in the U.S., theBillboardK-Towncolumn continued to provide chart information for K-pop artists on allBillboardcharts.[58][59]TheArtist 100debuted in July 2014.[60]In June 2019,Billboardlaunched the Top Songwriters Chart and the Top Producers Chart, based on weekly activity on the Hot 100 and other "Hot" genre charts.[61]Dance/Pop Songwriters and Dance/Pop Producers charts are scheduled to be launched in January 2025, based on the Hot Dance/Pop Songs chart.[32]In October 2021,Billboardlaunched theHot Trending Songscharts, utilising real-time music-related trends and conversations onTwitter.[62]