## Brazil national football team
TheBrazil national football team(Portuguese:Seleção Brasileira de Futebol;Brazilian Portuguese pronunciation:[se.leˈsɐ̃wbɾaziˈlejɾɐdʒifutʃiˈbɔw]), nicknamedSeleção Canarinho("Canary Squad", after their bright yellow jersey), representsBrazilin men's internationalfootballand is administered by theConfederação Brasileira de Futebol(English:Brazilian Football Confederation), the governing body offootball in Brazil. It has been a member ofFIFAsince 1923 and a founding member ofCONMEBOLsince 1916. It was also a member ofPFC, the unified confederation of the Americas from 1946 to 1961.
Brazil is the most successful national team in theFIFA World Cup, winning the tournament five times:1958,1962,1970,1994and2002. TheSeleçãoalso has average overall performance in the World Cup competition, both in proportional and absolute terms, with a record of 76 victories in 114 matches played, 129goal difference, 247 points, and 19 losses.[10][11]It is the only national team to have played in allWorld Cup editionswithout any absence nor need for playoffs,[12]and the only team to have won the World Cup in four different continents: once inEurope(the1958 editioninSweden), once inSouth America(the1962 editioninChile), twice inNorth America(the1970 editioninMexicoand the1994 tournamentin theUnited States), and once inAsia(the2002 editionco-hosted bySouth KoreaandJapan). Brazil was also the most successful team in the now-defunctFIFA Confederations Cup, winning it four times, in1997,2005,2009, and2013. With the capture of the gold medal at the2016 Summer Olympicsand the2020 Summer Olympics.[13]Brazil is one of only two countries, the other beingFrance, to have won all men's FIFA 11-player competitions at all age levels.[14][15][16][17][13]
Brazil has the highest averageElo football ratingover time, and the fourth all-time peak football Elo rating, established in 2022.[18]In FIFA's ranking system Brazil holds the record for mostTeam of the Yearfirst ranking wins with 14.[19]Many commentators, experts, and former players have considered the Brazil team of 1970, led byPelé, to be the greatest team of all time.[20][21][22][23][24][25]Other Brazilian teams are also highly esteemed and regularly appear listed among the best teams of all time, such as the Brazil teams of 1958–62 and the squads of the 1994–02 period, with honorary mentions for the gifted 1982 side.[26][27][28][29]In 1996, the Brazil national team achieved 35 consecutive matches undefeated, a feat which they held as a world record for 25 years.[30]
Brazil has developed many rivalries through the years, with the most notable ones being withArgentina—known as theSuperclássico das Américasin Portuguese,Italy—known as theClássico Mundialin Portuguese or theWorld Derbyin English,[31][32]Uruguay—known as theClássico do Rio Negro, due to the traumaticMaracanazo,[33]and theNetherlandsdue to several important meetings between the two teams at several World Cups.

## Early history (1914–1929)
It is generally believed that the inaugural game of the Brazil national football[34]team was a 1914 match between aRio de JaneiroandSão Pauloselect team and the English clubExeter City, held in Fluminense's stadium.[35][36]Brazil won 2–0 with goals byOswaldo GomesandOsman,[35][36][37]though it is claimed that the match was a 3–3 draw.[38][39]
In contrast to its future success, the national team's early appearances were not brilliant. Other early matches played during that time include several friendly games againstArgentina(being defeated 3–0),Chile(first in 1916) andUruguay(first on 12 July 1916), all nations to which football had been introduced decades earlier.[40]
Brazil participated in the first edition of the South American Championship (which would later become theCopa América) inArgentinain1916, finishing third place, and the1917edition inUruguay, also finishing third. However, led by the goalscoring abilities ofArthur Friedenreich, they were champions on home soil in the1919edition. Brazil finished third at the1920tournament held inChileand runners-up at the 1921 edition in Argentina. Brazil won the second title at home in1922, the 100th anniversary of Brazilian independence.
Brazil finished fourth place at the1923edition held in Uruguay, did not participate in the1924edition also held in Uruguay, and finished second at the1925tournament held in Argentina. Brazil did not take part in the1926(hosted by Chile),1927(held inPeru) and1929(hosted by Argentina) editions.

## First World Cup appearance and title drought (1930–1949)
In 1930, Brazil played inthe first FIFA World Cup, held inUruguay. The squad lost 2–1 toYugoslaviaand defeatedBolivia4–0, being eliminated from the competition in the group stage.[41]Four years later, Brazil lost in the first round toSpainin the all-knockout1934 World Cup, held inItaly.
After not taking part in the1935 South American Championshipheld in Peru and finishing runners up at the1937 South American Championshipheld in Argentina, Brazil reached the semi-finals in the1938edition held inFrance, knocking outPoland6–5,Czechoslovakiain the quarterfinals after a replay, before being defeated 2–1 by defending and eventual championsItaly. Brazil won third place after defeatingSweden4–2. Brazil were the onlySouth Americanteam to participate in this competition after other teams boycotted due to the fact that a European nation was hosting. After that, Brazil did not take part at the1939 South American Championshipheld in Peru.
Three South American Championship editions took place duringWorld War II:1941(held in Chile, where Brazil didn't take part),1942(hosted by Uruguay, and Brazil finished third), and1945(again held in Chile, where Brazil were runners-up).
After the war ended, Brazil participated in the1946 South American Championshipheld in Argentina, finishing runners-up, and didn't take part in the1947 editionhosted byEcuador. At the1949 South American Championshipheld in Brazil, the team won their third title, ending a 27-year streak without a South American title.[42]

## The 1950 World Cup at home and theMaracanazo
After World War II left Europe in ruins, Brazil hosted the1950 FIFA World Cupunopposed.
At the tournament's group stage, Brazil defeatedMexico4–0 at theMaracanãinRio de Janeiro(then the Brazilian capital), tied withSwitzerland2–2 at thePacaembuinSão Paulo, and returned to the Maracanã to defeatYugoslavia2–0.
Unlike the other tournaments before and after, this edition had a final group stage to decide the champions. At this stage, Brazil defeatedSweden7-1 andSpain6–1, both at the Maracanã.
The team went into the last game of the final round, againstUruguayat the Maracanã needing only a draw to win the World Cup. Brazil opened the score, but Uruguay made a comeback and won the match 2–1 with a goal byAlcides Ghiggiadeciding the match, and Uruguay won the World Cup in a game known as theMaracanazo. The match led to a period of national mourning and Brazil stopping wearing white as the main uniform.[43]

## 1951–1957
After the disappointment at the World Cup held at home, Brazil competed and finished runners up at the1953 South American Championshipheld in Peru.
For the1954 World CupinSwitzerland, Brazil was then almost completely renovated, with the team's uniform changed to yellow shirts with green details, blue shorts and white socks. The uniform was designed byAldyr Schleeand is still used today.[44]Brazil wanted to forget the Maracanazo, and still had a group of star players. Brazil defeatedMexico5-0 and tied withYugoslavia1–1 at the group stage. France was also in the group, but Brazil didn't play them as the tournament only held two matched at the group stage. In the quarterfinals, Brazil were beaten 4–2 by tournament favouritesHungaryin one of the ugliest matches in football history, known as the "Battle of Berne".[45]
Brazil didn't take part at the1955 South American Championshipheld in Chile, but finished fourth at the1956 editionheld in Uruguay and the1957 tournamenthosted by Peru.

## Pelé and the First Golden Era (1958–1970)
For the1958 World Cupheld inSweden, Brazil were drawn in a group withEngland, theSoviet UnionandAustria. They beat Austria 3–0 in their first match, then drew 0–0 with England. Before the match, coachVicente Feolamade three substitutions that were crucial for Brazil to defeat the Soviets:Zito,GarrinchaandPelé. From the kick-off, they kept up the pressure relentlessly, and after three minutes, which were later described as "the greatest three minutes in the history of football",[46]Vavágave Brazil the lead, and they won the match 2–0. Pelé scored the only goal of their quarter-final match againstWales, and they beatFrance5–2 in the semi-final. Brazil then also beatSweden5–2 inthe final, winning their first World Cup and becoming the first nation to win a World Cup title outside of its own continent. Pelé described it tearfully as a nation coming of age.[47]
Brazil then competed in two South American championships held in 1959. Thefirstwas hosted by Argentina and Brazil finished runners-up. Thesecondwas held in Ecuador and Brazil finished third place.
In the1962 World Cupheld inChile, Brazil was drawn withMexico,CzechoslovakiaandSpain. Brazil defeated Mexico 2–0 at the first match. The second was a goalless draw with Czechoslovakia, but Pelé got injured at this match and was unable to play for the rest of the tournament. So the protagonist became Garrincha as the star player, a mantle and responsibility laid upon him.[48][49]Brazil then defeated Spain 2–1 at the final group stage match. Brazil knocked outEngland3–1 in the quarterfinals, defeated hostsChile4–2 in the semifinals, and defended the World Cup title with a3-1 winin the final against Czechoslovakia.
The team then finished runners-up at the1963 South American Championshipheld in Bolivia.
In the1966 World Cupheld inEngland, Brazil had their worst performance in a World Cup. Brazil defeatedBulgaria2–0, but lost toHungary3–1. The tournament was remembered for its excessively physical play, and Pelé was one of the players most affected. AgainstPortugal, several violent tackles by the Portuguese defenders caused forward player Pelé to leave the match and the tournament. Brazil lost this match 3-1 and was eliminated in the first round of the World Cup for the first time since 1934. They have not failed to reach the knockout stages of the competition since. Brazil became the second defending champion to be eliminated in the first round afterItalyin 1950. France in 2002 (without scoring a single goal and drawing a match), Italy in 2010,Spainin 2014 andGermany2018 also repeated the unglorious feat. After the tournament, Pelé declared that he did not wish to play in the World Cup again. Nonetheless, he returned in 1970.[50]
After the early exit at the World Cup in 1966, Brazil did not take part in the1967 South American Championshipheld in Uruguay. This was the last time Brazil did not take part at the tournament, and that would be the last edition before the tournament was renamed as the Copa América.
At the1970 World Cupheld inMexico, the first World Cup held inNorth Americaand the first held outsideEuropeorSouth America, Brazil fielded what has been widely considered the best World Cup football squad ever,[20][21][22][26]led by Pelé in his last World Cup finals, captainCarlos Alberto Torres,Jairzinho,Tostão,GérsonandRivellino. Even though Garrincha had retired, this team was still a force to be reckoned with. They won all six of their games, starting with a 4–1 againstCzechoslovakia, then a 1–0 againstEngland, despite a spectacular save by Gordon Banks, and then a 3–2 againstRomaniaduring group play. Brazil then won 4–2 againstPeruin the quarterfinals, then defeatedUruguay3–1 in the semifinals andItaly4–1 inthe final. Jairzinho was the second top scorer with seven goals, and is the only player to score in every match in a World Cup; Pelé finished with four goals. Brazil lifted theJules Rimet trophyfor the third time (the first nation to do so), which meant that they were allowed to keep it. A replacement was then commissioned, though it would be 24 years before Brazil won it again.[51]The Jules Rimet trophywas stolenfrom the CBF in 1983, and never recovered. CBF then was awarded a replica.[52]

## The first dry spell (1971–1993)
After the international retirement of Pelé and other stars from the 1970 squad, Brazil played at the1974 World Cuphosted byWest Germany. Goalless draws withYugoslaviaandScotlandwere followed by a 3–0 win overZaireat the first group stage, finishing second in the group. At the second group stage, Brazil defeatedEast Germany1-0 andArgentina2–1, but was not able to overcome theNetherlands, being defeated 2–0, and then Brazil finished in fourth place after losing the third place game 1–0 toPoland.[53]
Brazil finished third place at the1975 Copa América, the first with no fixed hosts.
Then, at the1978 World Cupheld inArgentina, Brazil tiedSweden1-1, tiedSpain0-0 and defeatedAustria1–0 at the first group stage. Brazil finished second, the last time Brazil failed to win their group on the first stage. In the second group stage, Brazil defeatedPeru3–0, tied with tournament hostsArgentina0-0, and defeatedPoland3–1. However, Argentina defeated Peru 6–0 in a match held later the same day, and thus Argentina qualified for the final in a match accused of ultimately-unprovenmatch fixingat the expense of Brazil.Brazilsubsequently beatItaly2–1 in the third place play-off, and were the only team to remain unbeaten in the tournament.
Brazil then ended at third place at the1979 Copa América, also without a single host country.
At the1982 World Cup, held inSpain, Brazil were the tournament favorites, and easily moved through the first group stage, with a 2–1 win against theSoviet Union, a 4–1 victory againstScotlandand a 4–0 thrashing ofNew Zealand. In the second group stage, Brazil defeatedArgentina3–1, but a3–2 defeatinBarcelonatoItaly, in a classic World Cup match, eliminated them from the tournament in the match that they refer to as "Sarriá's Tragedy", referencing thestadium's name.[54][55]The1982 team, with a midfield ofSócrates,Zico,FalcãoandToninho Cerezo, is remembered as perhaps the greatest team never to win aWorld Cup.[27]
At the1983 Copa América, the third and final tournament without a fixed host, Brazil lost the title toUruguayand finished runners-up.
Several players, including Sócrates and Zico, from 1982 returned to play at the1986 World CupinMexico. Brazil, still a very good team and more disciplined defensively than four years earlier, won the three group stage matches (1–0 againstSpain, 1–0 againstAlgeria, and 3–0 againstNorthern Ireland), without conceding a goal. Then Brazil defeatedPoland4–0 in the round of 16, and in the quarterfinals Brazil faced theMichel Platini-ledFrancein a classic ofTotal Football. The game played to a 1–1 draw in regulation time where Zico missed a penalty kick, and after a goalless extra time, it all came down to a penalty shoot-out, where Brazil was defeated 4–3.
Brazil finished fifth place at the1987 Copa Américaheld inArgentina, and in 1989, Brazil hosted and won the1989 Copa América, thus ending Brazil's 19-year streak without an official title.
At the1990 World CupinItaly, Brazil was coached bySebastião Lazaroni, who had been the coach in the 1989 Copa América. With adefensive scheme, whose main symbol was midfielderDunga, forwardCarecaand three centre-backs, the team lacked creativity but made it to the second round after defeatingSweden2–1,Costa Rica1–0, andScotland1–0. Brazil was eliminated byDiego Maradona-ledArgentinain the round of 16 inTurin, losing to their South American archrivals 1–0 thanks to a goal byClaudio Caniggia.[56]
Brazil would struggle in the next cycle, as they finished runners-up at the1991 Copa Américaheld inChile, losing the title toArgentina. In the1993 Copa Américaheld inEcuador, Brazil was knocked out by Argentina on the quarterfinals on penalties. In thequalifiers for the 1994 World Cup, Brazil lost a qualifying match for the first time whenBoliviadefeated the team 2–0 inLa Paz. Brazil qualified for the tournament after defeating Uruguay at Maracanã with two Romário goals.

## The Second Golden Era (1994–2005)
Brazil went 24 years without winning a World Cup or even participating in a final. Their struggles ended at the1994 tournamentheld in theUnited States, where a solid side headed byRomárioandBebetoin attack, captainDungain midfield, goalkeeperCláudio Taffareland defenderJorginho, won the World Cup for a then-record fourth time. Brazil started by defeatingRussia2–0, then winning 3–0 againstCameroonand tying withSweden1-1. Their campaign proceeded a 1–0 victory over theUnited Statesin the round of 16 atStanford Stadiumon the4th of July, a 3–2 win over theNetherlandsin the quarter-finals inDallas, and a 1–0 victory overSwedenin a rematch of the group stage match at the semi-finals atPasadena'sRose Bowl. This set up Brazil–Italyin the final in Pasadena. A game played in searing heat ended as a goalless draw, with Italy's defence led byFranco Baresikeeping out Romário, penalty kicks loomed, and Brazil became champions withRoberto Baggiomissing Italy's last penalty.[57]Despite the triumph, the 1994 World Cup winning team is not held in the same high esteem in Brazil as their other World Cup winning teams.FourFourTwomagazine labelled the 1994 team "unloved" in Brazil due to their pragmatic, defensive style over the more typical Brazilian style of attacking flair, in spite of the players' individual status as idols (mainly Romário, who was known as a clinical striker and whose contributions to the team are widely regarded as responsible both for allowing the team to qualify following a rocky start and for winning the tournament).[51]
In the meantime, Brazil lost the1995 Copa Américato hostsUruguayon penalties, followed by victory in the1997tournament againstBolivia, the host of the latter tournament, after a3–1 win, the first time Brazil won the Copa América held outside of Brazil. That same year, Brazil won theConfederations CupinSaudi Arabiawith a6-0 winagainstAustralia.
Entering the1998 World Cupas defending champions, Brazil finished runner-up. Having topped their group after beatingScotland2–1, defeatingMorocco3-0 and losing 2–1 toNorway, Brazil thrashedChile4–1 in the round of 16, defeatedDenmark3–2 in the quarterfinals, and then Brazil beat theNetherlandson penalties in the semi-final following a 1–1 draw. Player of the tournamentRonaldoscored four goals and made three assists en route to thefinal. The build up to the final itself was overshadowed by Ronaldo suffering aconvulsive fitonly hours before kick off.[58]The starting line up without Ronaldo was released to a shocked world media, but after pleading that he felt fine and requested to play, Ronaldo was reinstated by the coach, before giving a below par performance asFrance, led byZidane, won3-0.[59]
Brazil won the1999 Copa Américaheld inParaguaywith a3–0 winoverUruguayin the final, but lost the1999 Confederations Cupfinalto hostsMexico, before being eliminated from the2001 Copa Américaheld inColombiain the quarterfinals with a 2–0 loss toHonduras. The team would also struggle in the2002 World Cup qualifiers, only securing a spot on the final matchday with a 3–0 victory overVenezuela.
However, the2002 World Cup, co-hosted bySouth KoreaandJapan, would be different, as Brazil topped their group with nine points and three wins. Brazil played the group stage in South Korea, and their first match was againstTurkey, inUlsan. In that match, Rivaldo fell to the ground clutching his face after Turkey'sHakan Ünsalhad kicked the ball at his legs. Rivaldo escaped suspension but was fined £5,180 for play-acting, and became the first player ever to be punished inFIFA's crackdown ondiving. Brazil came from behind to defeat the Turks 2–1. This was followed by a 4–0 win overChinaand a 5–2 victory againstCosta Rica. For the knockout round matches, Brazil traveled to Japan, continuing their campaign by defeatingBelgium2–0 inKobe. They then proceeded to defeatEngland2–1 in the quarter-finals inShizuoka, with the winning goal coming from a free-kick byRonaldinhofrom 40 yards out, but Ronaldinho was also sent off that match.[60]The semi-final was against Turkey inSaitama, a rematch of the group stage, with Brazil winning 1–0 to advance to their third consecutive final. Thefinalwas againstGermanyinYokohama, where Ronaldo scored both goals in Brazil's 2–0 triumph.[61]Ronaldo also won theGolden Shoeas the tournament's leading scorer with eight goals. Among the highlights of the campaign were the "Three R's" (Ronaldo,Rivaldoand Ronaldinho).[62]2002 was Brazil's fifth world championship, their last to date, with the success seeing them receive theLaureus World Sports Award for Team of the Year.[63]

## The second dry spell (2006–present)
After their World Cup victory inAsia, Brazil won the2004 Copa AméricainPeru, defeatingArgentinaon penalties after a2–2 draw in the final, with a late goal byAdrianoforcing the shootout. That was their third win in four competitions since 1997.[64]They also won theFIFA Confederations Cupfor the second time in2005, with a4–1 thumpingofArgentina.[65]ManagerCarlos Alberto Parreirabuilt his side through a 4–2–2–2 formation. Nicknamed the "Magic Quartet", the attack was built around four players: Ronaldo,Adriano,Kakáand Ronaldinho.[66]
In the2006 World Cupheld inGermany, Brazil won their three group games againstCroatia(1–0),Australia(2–0) andJapan(4–1).[67]Ronaldo scored twice and equalled the record for the most goals scored across all World Cups. In the round of 16, Brazil beatGhana3–0.[68]Ronaldo's goal was his 15th in World Cup history, breaking the record, which would later be broken byMiroslav Klosein 2014.[68]Brazil, however, were eliminated in the quarter-finals againstFrance, losing 1–0 to aThierry Henrygoal.[66]
Dungawas appointed as Brazil's new team manager in 2006.[69]Brazil then won the2007 Copa Américaheld inVenezuela, with a3-0 winagainstArgentinain the final.[70]Two years later, Brazil won the2009 FIFA Confederations Cup, defeating theUnited States3–2 inthe final, to seal their thirdConfederations Cuptitle.[71]
At the2010 World CupinSouth Africa, Brazil won their first two matches againstNorth Korea(2–1) and theIvory Coast(3–1), respectively.[72]Their last match, againstPortugal, ended in a 0–0 draw.[72]They facedChilein the round of 16, winning 3–0, although in the quarter-final they fell to theNetherlands2–1.[72][73]
In July 2010,Mano Menezeswas named as Brazil's new coach.[74]At the2011 Copa Américaheld inArgentina, Brazil lost againstParaguayon penalties and was eliminated in the quarter-finals. Brazil failed to score any penalty in the shootout.[75]In November 2012, coach Mano Menezes was sacked and replaced byLuiz Felipe Scolari.[76][77]
On 6 June 2013, Brazil was ranked 22nd in theFIFA World Rankings, their lowest ever.[78]At the2013 Confederations Cup, Brazil defended their title, beating Spain in thefinal,[79]winning 3–0 and sealing their fourth Confederations Cup title.[80][81]

## 2014 FIFA World Cup
In theopening match of the 2014 World Cupon home soil againstCroatia, two goals fromNeymarand one fromOscarsealed a 3–1 comeback win after aMarceloown goal.[82]The team then drew 0–0 withMexico, before confirming qualification to theknockout stageby defeatingCameroon4–1.[83][84]Brazil facedChilein theround of 16, needing penalties to prevail to the next round following a 1–1 draw.[85]
The team again faced South American opposition in thequarter-final, defeatingColombia2–1. However, late in the match, Neymar was stretchered off after a horrible challenge byZuniga, which led to the Brazilian suffering afracturedvertebra, ruling him out for the remainder of the tournament.[86]
TheSeleçãowent on to lose7–1to theGermans, their biggest ever defeat at the World Cup and first home loss in a competitive match since 1975.[87]The match has been nicknamed theMineirazo, making reference to the nation's previous World Cup defeat on home soil, theMaracanazoagainst Uruguay in 1950, and theMineirão stadiumwhere the match took place.[88]In that match,Miroslav Klosescored, making him the top goalscorer at the FIFA World Cup with 16 goals. Curiously, Ronaldo Fenômeno was at the stadium as a commentator for Rede Globo.[89]
Brazil subsequently lost 3–0 to theNetherlandsin the third-place play-off match.[90][91]Following the tournament, Scolari announced his resignation.[92]

## After the 2014 FIFA World Cup (2014–2022)
On 22 July 2014, Dunga was announced as the new manager of Brazil, returning to the position for his second stint leading the national team.[93]
At the2015 Copa Américaheld inChile, Brazil finished first in Group C to advance to the knockout stages.[94]However, they were eliminated in the next round, again losing on penalties toParaguay.[95]
At the 2016Copa América Centenarioheld in theUnited States, Brazil began the tournament with a goalless draw withEcuadorbefore beatingHaiti7–1 in the next match.[96]Needing only a draw to progress to the knockout stage of the tournament, Brazil suffered a controversial 1–0 loss toPeru, withRaúl Ruidíazscoring in the 75th minute.[97]This defeat saw Brazil eliminated from the tournament in the group stage for the first time since1987.,[98][99]and also resulted in Dunga being fired from the national team.[100]
On 14 June 2016,Titereplaced Dunga as manager of Brazil.[101][102]At the2018 FIFA World Cup, Brazil finished top of their group, tying withSwitzerland1-1, defeatingCosta Rica2-0 andSerbia2–0.[103]After defeatingMexico2–0 in the round of 16,[104]Brazil were eliminated in the quarter-finals byBelgium, losing 2–1.[105][106][107]Despite elimination from the tournament, Tite remained as head coach.
The2019 Copa Américawas held on home soil, with the team beginning the campaign with a 3–0 win againstBolivia, where the Brazilians notoriously wore a white uniform. Then Brazil had a goalless draw withVenezuela, and thumpedPeru5–0. In the quarterfinals, Brazil defeatedParaguayon penalties after another goalless draw. After beating rivalsArgentina2–0 in the semi-finals,[108]Brazil beat Peru 3–1 in the final to win their ninth Copa América title, and their first since 2007.[109]The team only conceded once during the tournament, during the final from a penalty kick. The next Copa América was originally scheduled to be played the following year, but due to theCOVID-19 pandemic, the competition was postponed to2021. As a result,ColombiaandArgentinaresigned as co-hosts,[110]and Brazil was selected to host the tournament.[111]The hosts reached thefinalonce again, this time being defeated byArgentina1–0 in theMaracanã Stadium; this was the first time Brazil failed to win the Copa América on home soil.[112]
At the2022 World Cup, Brazil finished first in their group, with the team defeatingSerbia2–0,Switzerland1-0 and losing toCameroon1–0.[113]The team then facedSouth Koreain the round of 16, winning by 4–1,[114]and progressed to the quarter-finals where they lost on penalties toCroatiaafter a 1–1 draw.[115]Following their exit from the World Cup, Tite resigned as head coach.[116]

## Recent years (2023–present)
After Tite left,Ramon Menezesserved as manager from March to July 2023, before being replaced byFernando Dinizuntil the end of the year. Diniz's tenure ended after Brazil lost toArgentina1–0 at the Maracanã, with this defeat being their first home loss in FIFA World Cup qualifiers.
The CBF then appointedDorival Júnioras manager. At the2024 Copa Américaheld in theUnited States, Brazil tied 0–0 withCosta Rica, thrashedParaguay4-1 and tied 1–1 withColombia. Brazil was eliminated on penalties byUruguayin the quarter-finals following a 0–0 draw.[117]Dorival was fired after losing 4–1 to Argentina at theMonumental de Nuñez,[118]and in his place the federation appointed Italian managerCarlo Ancelottias a replacement.[119][120]
Brazil qualified for the2026 FIFA World Cupafter a 1–0 victory againstParaguayon 10 June 2025.[121]

## Uniforms
Brazil's first team colors were white with blue collars, but following the defeat atMaracanãin the 1950 World Cup, the colors were criticized for lacking patriotism. With permission from the Brazilian Sports Confederation, the newspaperCorreio da Manhãheld a competition to design a new kit incorporating the four colors of the Brazilian flag.[122]The winning design was a yellow jersey with green trim and blue shorts with white trim drawn byAldyr Garcia Schlee, a nineteen-year-old fromPelotas.[122]The new colors were first used in March 1954 in a match againstChile, and have been used ever since.Topperwere the manufacturers of Brazil's kit up to and including the match againstWaleson 11 September 1991;Umbrotook over before the next match, versusYugoslaviain October 1991.[123]Nikebegan making the kits for Brazil in late 1996, in time for the1997 Copa Américaand the1998 FIFA World Cup.[124]
The use of blue and white as the second kit colors owes its origins to the defunct latter-day Portuguese monarchy and dates from the 1930s, but it became the permanent second choice accidentally in the1958 FIFA World Cup final. Brazil's opponents wereSweden, who also wore yellow, and a draw gave the home team, Sweden, the right to play in yellow. Brazil, who traveled with no second kit, hurriedly purchased a set of blue shirts and sewed the badges taken from their yellow shirts on them.[125]

## Nicknames
The Brazil national team is known by different names in various parts of the world. Nicknames for the squad in Brazil include:
Some Latin American commentators often refer to the Brazil team asEl ScratchorScratch du Oro(The Scratch), among others.[132]In the2022 World Cup,FIFA'sYouTubechannel referred to the team asSamba Boys.[133][134]

## Training camp
Brazil's training camp is theGranja ComaryinTeresópolis, located 90 km (56 mi) from Rio de Janeiro.[135]Granja Comary was opened in 1987,[136]and underwent significant renovations in 2013 and 2014.

## Results and fixtures
The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.
WinDrawLossFixture

## Current squad
The following players were named in the squad forfriendlymatches againstFranceandCroatiaon 26 and 31 March 2026, respectively.[143]Alisson,Alex Sandro,Gabriel Magalhães,RaphinhaandWesleywere originally on the list, but withdrew through injuries and were replaced byHugo Souza,KaikiandVitor Reis.Caps and goals are correct as of 26 March 2026, after the match againstFrance.

## Recent call-ups
The following players have also been called up to the Brazil squad in the last twelve months.

## Manager records
Mário Zagallobecame the first person to win theFIFA World Cupboth as a player (1958and1962) and as a manager (1970). In 1970, at the age of 38, he became the second-youngest coach to win the tournament. While still in Brazil as an assistant coach, the team won the1994 FIFA World Cup.[151]

## Competitive record
ChampionsRunners-upThird placeFourth placeTournament played fully or partially on home soil

## FIFA World Cup
Brazil has qualified for every FIFA World Cup they entered, never requiring a qualifying play-off. With five titles, they have won the tournament on more occasions than any other national team.

## Head-to-head record
Below is a result summary of all matches Brazil have played againstFIFArecognized teams.[152]
Updated on 31 March, after the match againstFrance.
Positive RecordNeutral RecordNegative Record