## Carbon
Carbon(fromLatincarbo'coal') is achemical element;  it hassymbolCandatomic number6. It isnonmetallicandtetravalent—meaning that itsatomsare able to form up to fourcovalent bondsdue to itsvalence shellexhibiting 4 electrons. It belongs to group 14 of theperiodic table.[14]Carbon makes up about 0.025 percent of Earth's crust.[15]Threeisotopesoccur naturally,12Cand13Cbeing stable, while14Cis aradionuclide, decaying with ahalf-lifeof 5,700 years.[13]Carbon is one of thefew elements known since antiquity.[16]
Carbon is the 15thmost abundant element in the Earth's crust, and thefourth most abundant element in the universe by massafterhydrogen,helium, andoxygen.[17]Carbon's abundance, its unique diversity oforganic compounds, and its unusual ability to formpolymersat the temperatures commonly encountered on Earth, enables it to serve as the common element ofall known life. It is the second most abundant element in the human body by mass (about 18.5%) after oxygen.[18]
The atoms of carbon can bond together in diverse ways, resulting in variousallotropes of carbon.[19]Well-knownallotropesincludegraphite,diamond,amorphous carbon, andfullerenes. Thephysical propertiesof carbon vary widely with the allotropic form. For example, graphite isopaqueand black, while diamond is highlytransparent. Graphite is soft enough to form a streak on paper (hence its name, from the Greek verb "γράφειν" which means "to write"), while diamond is the hardest naturally occurring material known. Graphite is a goodelectrical conductorwhile diamond has a lowelectrical conductivity. Under normal conditions, diamond,carbon nanotubes, andgraphenehave the highestthermal conductivitiesof all known materials. All carbon allotropes are solids under normal conditions, with graphite being the mostthermodynamically stableform at standard temperature and pressure. They are chemically resistant and require high temperature to react even with oxygen.
The most commonoxidation stateof carbon ininorganic compoundsis +4, while +2 is found incarbon monoxideandtransition metalcarbonylcomplexes. The largest sources of inorganic carbon arelimestones,dolomitesandcarbon dioxide, but significant quantities occur in organic deposits ofcoal,peat,oil, andmethane clathrates. Carbon forms a vast number ofcompounds, with about two hundred million having been described and indexed;[20]and yet that number is still only a fraction of the number of theoretically possible compounds under standard conditions.

## Characteristics
Carbon in its solid state exists in severalallotropes, includinggraphite, a soft, black, and slippery material, anddiamond, the hardest naturally occurring substance. This variation in physical properties arises from differences in atomic arrangement: graphite consists of layers of hexagonally arranged carbon atoms, while diamond features a rigid three-dimensional lattice.[22]
Chemically, carbon is notable for its ability to form stablechemical bondswith many elements, particularly with other carbon atoms, and is capable of forming multiple stablecovalent bondswith suitable multivalent atoms. Carbon is a component element in the large majority of allchemical compounds, with about two hundred million examples having been described in the published chemical literature.[20]Carbon also has the highestsublimationpoint of all elements. Atatmospheric pressureit has no melting point, as itstriple pointis at 10.8 ± 0.2 megapascals (106.6 ± 2.0 atm; 1,566 ± 29 psi) and 4,600 ± 300 K (4,330 ± 300 °C; 7,820 ± 540 °F),[5][6]so it sublimes at about 3,900 K (3,630 °C; 6,560 °F).[23][24]
Compared to its well-known solid allotropes, the liquid and gaseous phases of carbon are far less studied. In the vapor phase, some of the carbon is in the form of highly reactivediatomic carbon(also known as dicarbon, with achemical formulaofC2). When excited, this gas glows green.[25][26]The liquid phase of carbon is a dark, mobile, and reflective liquid that can only exist above 4,000 K (3,730 °C; 6,740 °F) and under pressures exceeding 100atmospheres.[27]
Carbon is the sixth element, with a ground-stateelectron configurationof 1s22s22p2, of which the four outer electrons arevalence electrons. Its first four ionisation energies, 1086.5, 2352.6, 4620.5 and 6222.7 kJ/mol, are much higher than those of the heavier group-14 elements. The electronegativity of carbon is 2.5, significantly higher than the heavier group-14 elements (1.8–1.9), but close to most of the nearby nonmetals, as well as some of the second- and third-rowtransition metals. Carbon'scovalent radiiare normally taken as 77.2 pm (C−C), 66.7 pm (C=C) and 60.3 pm (C≡C), although these may vary depending on coordination number and what the carbon is bonded to. In general, covalent radius decreases with lower coordination number and higher bond order.[28]

## Chemical
Graphite is much more reactive than diamond at standard conditions, despite being more thermodynamically stable, as its delocalisedpi systemis much more vulnerable to attack.[29]For example, graphite can be oxidised by hot concentratednitric acidat standard conditions tomellitic acid, C6(CO2H)6, which preserves the hexagonal units of graphite while breaking up the larger structure.[30]
Carbon-based compounds form the basis of all known life on Earth, and thecarbon-nitrogen-oxygen cycleprovides a small portion of the energy produced by the Sun, and most of the energy in larger stars (e.g.Sirius). Although it forms an extraordinary variety of compounds, most forms of carbon are comparatively unreactive under normal conditions. At standard temperature and pressure, it resists all but the strongest oxidizers. It does not react withsulfuric acid,hydrochloric acid,chlorineor anyalkalis. At elevated temperatures, carbon reacts with oxygen to formcarbon oxidesand will rob oxygen from metal oxides to leave the elemental metal. Thisexothermic reactionis used in the iron and steel industry tosmeltiron and to control the carbon content ofsteel:[31]
Carbon reacts with sulfur to formcarbon disulfide, and it reacts with steam in the coal-gas reaction used incoal gasification:[32][33][34]
Carbon combines with some metals at high temperatures to form metallic carbides, such as the iron carbidecementitein steel andtungsten carbide, widely used as an abrasive and for making hard tips for cutting tools.[35][36]

## Allotropes
Atomic carbonis a very short-lived species and, therefore, carbon is stabilized in various multi-atomic structures with diverse molecular configurations calledallotropes. The three relatively well-known allotropes of carbon areamorphous carbon,graphite, and diamond. Once considered exotic,fullerenesare nowadays commonly synthesized and used in research; they includebuckyballs,[37][38]carbon nanotubes,[39]carbon nanobuds[40]andnanofibers.[41][42]Several other exotic allotropes have also been discovered, such aslonsdaleite,[43]glassy carbon,[44]carbon nanofoam[45]andlinear acetylenic carbon(carbyne).[46]
The system of carbon allotropes spans a range of extremes:
Grapheneis a two-dimensional sheet of carbon with the atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice. As of 2009, graphene appears to be the strongest material ever tested.[52]The process of separating it from graphite will require some further technological development before it is economical for industrial processes.[53]If successful, graphene could be used in the construction of aspace elevator. It could also be used to safely store hydrogen for use in a hydrogen based engine in cars.[54]
Theamorphousform is an assortment of carbon atoms in a non-crystalline, irregular, glassy state, not held in a crystalline macrostructure. It is present as a powder, and is the main constituent of substances such as charcoal,lampblack(soot), andactivated carbon. At normal pressures, carbon takes the form of graphite, in which each atom is bonded trigonally to three others in a plane composed of fusedhexagonalrings, just like those inaromatic hydrocarbons.[55]The resulting network is 2-dimensional, and the resulting flat sheets are stacked and loosely bonded through weakvan der Waals forces. This gives graphite its softness and itscleavingproperties (the sheets slip easily past one another). Because of the delocalization of one of the outer electrons of each atom to form aπ-cloud, graphite conductselectricity, but only in the plane of eachcovalently bondedsheet. This results in a lower bulkelectrical conductivityfor carbon than for most metals. The delocalization also accounts for the energetic stability of graphite over diamond at room temperature.[56]
At very high pressures, carbon forms the more compact allotrope, diamond, having nearly twice the density of graphite. Here, each atom is bondedtetrahedrallyto four others, forming a 3-dimensional network of puckered six-membered rings of atoms. Diamond has the samecubic structureassiliconandgermanium, and because of the strength of the carbon-carbonbonds, it is the hardest naturally occurring substance measured byresistance to scratching. Contrary to the popular belief that"diamonds are forever", they are thermodynamically unstable (ΔfG°(diamond, 298 K) = 2.9 kJ/mol[57]) under normal conditions (298 K, 105Pa) and should theoretically transform into graphite.[58]But due to a highactivation energybarrier, the transition into graphite is so slow at normal temperature that it is unnoticeable. However, at very high temperatures diamond will turn into graphite, and diamonds can burn up in a house fire. The bottom left corner of the phase diagram for carbon has not been scrutinized experimentally. Although a computational study employingdensity functional theorymethods reached the conclusion that asT→ 0 Kandp→ 0 Pa, diamond becomes more stable than graphite by approximately 1.1 kJ/mol,[59]more recent and definitive experimental and computational studies show that graphite is more stable than diamond forT< 400 K, without applied pressure, by 2.7 kJ/mol atT= 0 K and 3.2 kJ/mol atT= 298.15 K.[60]Under some conditions, carbon crystallizes aslonsdaleite, ahexagonal crystal latticewith all atoms covalently bonded and properties similar to those of diamond.[43]
Fullerenesare a synthetic crystalline formation with a graphite-like structure, but in place of flathexagonal cellsonly, some of the cells of which fullerenes are formed may be pentagons, nonplanar hexagons, or even heptagons of carbon atoms. The sheets are thus warped into spheres, ellipses, or cylinders. The properties of fullerenes (split into buckyballs, buckytubes, and nanobuds) have not yet been fully analyzed and represent an intense area of research innanomaterials. The namesfullereneandbuckyballare given afterRichard Buckminster Fuller, popularizer ofgeodesic domes, which resemble the structure of fullerenes. The buckyballs are fairly large molecules formed completely of carbon bonded trigonally, formingspheroids(the best-known and simplest is the soccerball-shaped C60buckminsterfullerene).[37]Carbon nanotubes (buckytubes) are structurally similar to buckyballs, except that each atom is bonded trigonally in a curved sheet that forms a hollowcylinder.[38][39]Nanobuds were first reported in 2007 and are hybrid buckytube/buckyball materials (buckyballs are covalently bonded to the outer wall of a nanotube) that combine the properties of both in a single structure.[40]
Of the other discovered allotropes, carbon nanofoam is a ferromagnetic allotrope discovered in 1997. It consists of a low-density cluster-assembly of carbon atoms strung together in a loose three-dimensional web, in which the atoms are bonded trigonally in six- and seven-membered rings. It is among the lightest known solids, with a density of about 2 kg/m3.[61]Similarly,glassy carboncontains a high proportion of closedporosity,[44]but contrary to normal graphite, the graphitic layers are not stacked like pages in a book, but have a more random arrangement.Linear acetylenic carbon[46]has the chemical structure[46]−(C≡C)n− . Carbon in this modification is linear withsporbital hybridization, and is apolymerwith alternating single and triple bonds. This carbyne is of considerable interest tonanotechnologyas itsYoung's modulusis 40 times that of the hardest known material – diamond.[62]
In 2015, a team at theNorth Carolina State Universityannounced the development of another allotrope they have dubbedQ-carbon, created by a high-energy low-duration laser pulse on amorphous carbon dust. Q-carbon is reported to exhibit ferromagnetism,fluorescence, and a hardness superior to diamonds.[63]

## Isotopes
Isotopesof carbon areatomic nucleithat contain sixprotonsplus a number ofneutrons(varying from 2 to 16). Carbon has two stable, naturally occurring isotopes.[64]The isotopecarbon-12(12C) forms 98.93% of the carbon on Earth, whilecarbon-13(13C) forms the remaining 1.07%.[64]The concentration of12C is further increased in biological materials because biochemical reactions discriminate against13C.[65]In 1961, theInternational Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry(IUPAC) adopted the isotope carbon-12 as the basis foratomic weights.[66]Identification of carbon innuclear magnetic resonance(NMR) experiments is done with the isotope13C.[67]
Carbon-14(14C) is a naturally occurringradioisotope, created in theupper atmosphere(lowerstratosphereand uppertroposphere) by interaction of nitrogen with cosmic rays.[68]It is found in trace amounts on Earth of 1 part pertrillion(0.0000000001%) or more, mostly confined to the atmosphere and superficial deposits, particularly of peat and other organic materials.[69]This isotope decays by 0.158 MeVβ−emission. Because of its relatively shorthalf-lifeof5700±30years,[13]14C is virtually absent in ancient rocks. The amount of14C in theatmosphereand in living organisms is almost constant, but decreases predictably in their bodies after death. This principle is used inradiocarbon dating, invented in 1949, which has been used extensively to determine the age of carbonaceous materials with ages up to about 40,000 years.[70][71]
There are 15 known isotopes of carbon and the shortest-lived of these is8C which decays throughproton emissionand has a half-life of 3.5×10−21s.[13]The exotic19C exhibits anuclear halo, which means its radius is appreciably larger than would be expected if the nucleus were a sphere of constant density.[72]

## Occurrence
Carbon is thefourth most abundant chemical elementin the observable universe by mass after hydrogen, helium, and oxygen. Carbon is abundant in the Sun, stars, comets, and in theatmospheresof most planets.[73]Somemeteoritescontain microscopic diamonds that were formed when the Solar System was still aprotoplanetary disk.[74]Microscopic diamonds may also be formed by the intense pressure and high temperature at the sites of meteorite impacts.[75]
In 2014NASAannounced agreatly upgraded databasefor trackingpolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons(PAHs) in the universe. More than 20% of the carbon in the universe may be associated with PAHs, complex compounds of carbon and hydrogen without oxygen.[76]These compounds figure in thePAH world hypothesiswhere they are hypothesized to have a role inabiogenesisand formation of life. PAHs seem to have been formed "a couple of billion years" after theBig Bang, are widespread throughout the universe, and are associated withnew starsandexoplanets.[73]
It has been estimated that the solid earth as a whole contains 730 ppm of carbon, with 2000 ppm in the core and 120 ppm in the combined mantle and crust.[77]Since the mass of the earth is5.972×1024kg, this would imply 4360 milliongigatonnesof carbon. This is much more than the amount of carbon in the oceans or atmosphere (below).
In combination with oxygen in carbon dioxide, carbon is found in the Earth's atmosphere (approximately 900 gigatonnes of carbon — each ppm corresponds to 2.13 Gt) and dissolved in all water bodies (approximately 36,000 gigatonnes of carbon). Carbon in thebiospherehas been estimated at 550 gigatonnes but with a large uncertainty, due mostly to a huge uncertainty in the amount of terrestrial deepsubsurface bacteria.[78]Hydrocarbons(such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas) contain carbon as well. Coal "reserves" (not "resources") amount to around 900 gigatonnes with perhaps 18,000 Gt of resources.[79]Oil reservesare around 150 gigatonnes. Proven sources of natural gas are about175×1012cubic metres(containing about 105 gigatonnes of carbon), but studies estimate another900×1012cubic metresof "unconventional" deposits such asshale gas, representing about 540 gigatonnes of carbon.[80]
Carbon is also found inmethane hydratesin polar regions and under the seas.[81]Various estimates put this carbon between 500, 2500,[82]or 3,000 Gt.[83]
According to one source, in the period from 1751 to 2008 about 347 gigatonnes of carbon were released as carbon dioxide to the atmosphere from burning of fossil fuels.[84]Another source puts the amount added to the atmosphere for the period since 1750 at 879 Gt, and the total going to the atmosphere, sea, and land (such aspeat bogs) at almost 2,000 Gt.[85]
Carbon is a constituent (about 12% by mass) of the very large masses ofcarbonaterock (limestone,dolomite,marble, and others). Coal is very rich in carbon (anthracitecontains 92–98%)[86]and is the largest commercial source of mineral carbon, accounting for 4,000 gigatonnes or 80% offossil fuel.[87]
As for individual carbon allotropes, graphite is found in large quantities in China, Russia, Mexico, Canada, and India.[88]Natural diamonds occur in the rockkimberlite, found in ancient volcanic "necks", or "pipes". Most diamond deposits are in Africa, notably in South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, the Republic of the Congo, and Angola. Diamond deposits have also been found inArkansas, Canada, the Russian Arctic, Brazil, and in Northern and Western Australia.[89]Diamonds are found naturally, but about 90% of all industrial diamonds used in the U.S. are now manufactured.[90]
Carbon-14 is formed in upper layers of the troposphere and the stratosphere at altitudes of 9–15 km by a reaction that is precipitated bycosmic rays.[91]Thermal neutronsare produced that collide with the nuclei of nitrogen-14, forming carbon-14 and a proton. As such,1.5%×10−10of atmospheric carbon dioxide contains carbon-14.[92]
Carbon-rich asteroids are relatively preponderant in the outer parts of theasteroid beltin the Solar System.[93]These asteroids have not yet been directly sampled by scientists. The asteroids can be used in hypotheticalspace-based carbon mining, which may be possible in the future, but is currently technologically impossible.[94]

## Formation in stars
Formation of the carbon atomic nucleus occurs within agiantorsupergiantstar through thetriple-alpha process. This requires a nearly simultaneous collision of threealpha particles(helium nuclei), as the products of furthernuclear fusionreactions of helium with hydrogen or another helium nucleus producelithium-5andberyllium-8respectively, both of which are highly unstable and decay almost instantly back into smaller nuclei.[95]The triple-alpha process happens in conditions of temperatures over 100 megakelvins and helium concentration that the rapid expansion and cooling of the early universe prohibited, and therefore no significant carbon was created during the Big Bang.[96]
According to current physical cosmology theory, carbon is formed in the interiors of stars on thehorizontal branch.[97]When massive stars die as supernova, the carbon is scattered into space as dust. This dust becomes component material for the formation of the next-generation star systems with accreted planets.[73][98]The Solar System is one such star system with an abundance of carbon, enabling the existence of life as we know it. It is the opinion of most scholars that all the carbon in the Solar System and theMilky Waycomes from dying stars.[99][100][101]
TheCNO cycleis an additional hydrogen fusion mechanism that powers stars, wherein carbon operates as a catalyst.[102]
Rotational transitions of various isotopic forms of carbon monoxide (for example,12CO,13CO, and18CO) are detectable in thesubmillimeterwavelength range, and are used in the study of newly forming stars inmolecular clouds.[103]

## Carbon cycle
Under terrestrial conditions, conversion of one element to another is very rare. Therefore, the amount of carbon on Earth is effectively constant. Thus, processes that use carbon must obtain it from somewhere and dispose of it somewhere else. The paths of carbon in the environment form thecarbon cycle.[104]For example,photosyntheticplants draw carbon dioxide from the atmosphere (or seawater) and build it into biomass, as in theCalvin cycle, a process ofcarbon fixation.[105]Some of this biomass is eaten by animals, while some carbon is exhaled by animals as carbon dioxide. The carbon cycle is considerably more complicated than this short loop; for example, some carbon dioxide is dissolved in the oceans; if bacteria do not consume it, dead plant or animal matter may become petroleum or coal, which releases carbon when burned.[106][107]

## Organic compounds
Carbon can form very long chains of interconnectingcarbon–carbon bonds, a property that is calledcatenation. Carbon-carbon bonds are strong and stable. Through catenation, carbon forms a countless number of compounds. A tally of unique compounds shows that more contain carbon than do not.[108]
The simplest form of an organic molecule is the hydrocarbon—a large family of organic molecules that are composed of hydrogen atoms bonded to a chain of carbon atoms. A hydrocarbon backbone can be substituted by other atoms, known asheteroatoms. Common heteroatoms that appear in organic compounds include oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus, and the nonradioactive halogens, as well as the metals lithium and magnesium. Organic compounds containing bonds to metal are known as organometallic compounds (see below). Certain groupings of atoms, often including heteroatoms, recur in large numbers of organic compounds. These collections, known asfunctional groups, confer common reactivity patterns and allow for the systematic study and categorization of organic compounds. Chain length, shape and functional groups all affect the properties of organic molecules.[109]
In most stable compounds of carbon (and nearly all stableorganiccompounds), carbon obeys theoctet ruleand istetravalent, meaning that a carbon atom forms a total of four covalent bonds (which may include double and triple bonds). Exceptions include a small number of stabilizedcarbocations(three bonds, positive charge),radicals(three bonds, neutral),carbanions(three bonds, negative charge) andcarbenes(two bonds, neutral), although these species are much more likely to be encountered as unstable, reactive intermediates.[67]
Carbon occurs in all known organic life and is the basis oforganic chemistry. When united with hydrogen, it forms various hydrocarbons that are important to industry as refrigerants, lubricants, solvents, as chemical feedstock for the manufacture of plastics and petrochemicals, and as fossil fuels.[67]
When combined with oxygen and hydrogen, carbon can form many groups of important biological compounds including sugars,lignans,chitins, alcohols, fats, aromaticesters,carotenoidsandterpenes. With nitrogen, it formsalkaloids, and with the addition of sulfur also it forms antibiotics,amino acids, and rubber products. With the addition of phosphorus to these other elements, it formsDNAandRNA, the chemical-code carriers of life, andadenosine triphosphate(ATP), the most important energy-transfer molecule in all living cells.[110]Norman Horowitz, head of theMariner and Viking missions to Mars(1965–1976), considered that the unique characteristics of carbon made it unlikely that any other element could replace carbon, even on another planet, to generate the biochemistry necessary for life.[111]

## Inorganic compounds
Commonly carbon-containing compounds which are associated with minerals or which do not contain bonds to the other carbon atoms, halogens, or hydrogen, are treated separately from classical organic compounds; the definition is not rigid, and the classification of some compounds can vary from author to author (see reference articles above). Among these are the simple oxides of carbon. The most prominent oxide is carbon dioxide (CO2). This was once the principal constituent of thepaleoatmosphere, but is a minor component of theEarth's atmospheretoday.[112]Dissolved in water, it formscarbonic acid(H2CO3), but as most compounds with multiple single-bonded oxygens on a single carbon it is unstable.[113]Through this intermediate, though, resonance-stabilized carbonateionsare produced. Some important minerals are carbonates, notablycalcite.Carbon disulfide(CS2) is similar.[30]
The other common oxide is carbon monoxide (CO). It is formed by incomplete combustion, and is a colorless, odorless gas. The molecules each contain a triple bond and are fairlypolar, resulting in a tendency to bind permanently to hemoglobin molecules, displacing oxygen, which has a lower binding affinity.[114][115]Cyanide(CN−), has a similar structure, but behaves much like ahalideion (pseudohalogen). For example, it can form the nitridecyanogenmolecule ((CN)2), similar to diatomic halides. Likewise, the heavier analog of cyanide,cyaphide(CP−), is also considered inorganic, though most simple derivatives are highly unstable. Other uncommon oxides arecarbon suboxide(C3O2),[116]the unstabledicarbon monoxide(C2O),[117][118]carbon trioxide(CO3),[119][120]cyclopentanepentone(C5O5),[121]cyclohexanehexone(C6O6),[121]andmellitic anhydride(C12O9). However, mellitic anhydride is the triple acyl anhydride of mellitic acid; moreover, it contains a benzene ring. Thus, many chemists consider it to be organic.[122]
With reactive metals, such astungsten, carbon forms eithercarbides(C4−) oracetylides(C2−2) to form alloys with high melting points. These anions are also associated with methane andacetylene, both very weak acids. With an electronegativity of 2.5,[123]carbon prefers to formcovalent bonds. A few carbides are covalent lattices, likecarborundum(SiC), which resembles diamond. Nevertheless, even the most polar and salt-like of carbides are not completely ionic compounds.[124]

## Organometallic compounds
Organometallic compounds by definition contain at least one carbon-metal covalent bond. A wide range of such compounds exist; major classes include simple alkyl-metal compounds (for example,tetraethyllead), η2-alkene compounds (for example,Zeise's salt), and η3-allyl compounds (for example,allylpalladium chloride dimer);metallocenescontaining cyclopentadienyl ligands (for example,ferrocene); andtransition metal carbene complexes. Manymetal carbonylsandmetal cyanidesexist (for example,tetracarbonylnickelandpotassium ferricyanide); some workers consider metal carbonyl and cyanide complexes without other carbon ligands to be purely inorganic, and not organometallic. However, most organometallic chemists consider metal complexes with any carbon ligand, even 'inorganic carbon' (e.g., carbonyls, cyanides, and certain types of carbides and acetylides) to be organometallic in nature. Metal complexes containing organic ligands without a carbon-metal covalent bond (e.g., metal carboxylates) are termedmetalorganiccompounds.[125]
While carbon is understood to strongly prefer formation of four covalent bonds, other exotic bonding schemes are also known.Carboranesare highly stable dodecahedral derivatives of the [B12H12]2-unit, with one BH replaced with a CH+. Thus, the carbon is bonded to five boron atoms and one hydrogen atom. The cation [(Ph3PAu)6C]2+contains an octahedral carbon bound to six phosphine-gold fragments. This phenomenon has been attributed to theaurophilicityof the gold ligands, which provide additional stabilization of an otherwise labile species.[126]In nature, the iron-molybdenum cofactor (FeMoco) responsible for microbialnitrogen fixationlikewise has an octahedral carbon center (formally a carbide, C(-IV)) bonded to six iron atoms. In 2016, it was confirmed that, in line with earlier theoretical predictions, thehexamethylbenzene dicationcontains a carbon atom with six bonds. More specifically, the dication could be described structurally by the formulation [MeC(η5-C5Me5)]2+, making it an "organicmetallocene" in which a MeC3+fragment is bonded to a η5-C5Me5−fragment through all five of the carbons of the ring.[127]
In the cases above, each of the bonds to carbon contain less than two formal electron pairs. Thus, the formal electron count of these species does not exceed an octet. This makes them hypercoordinate but not hypervalent. Even in cases of alleged 10-C-5 species (that is, a carbon with five ligands and a formal electron count of ten), as reported by Akiba and co-workers, electronic structure calculations conclude that the electron population around carbon is still less than eight, as is true for other compounds featuring four-electronthree-center bonding.[128]

## History and etymology
The English namecarboncomes from the Latincarbofor coal and charcoal, whence also comes the Frenchcharbon, meaning charcoal.[129]In German, Dutch and Danish, the names for carbon areKohlenstoff,koolstof, andkulstofrespectively, all literally meaning coal-substance.[130][131][132][133][134][135]
Carbon was discovered in prehistory and was known in the forms of soot and charcoal to the earliest human civilizations. Diamonds were known probably as early as 2500 BCE in China, while carbon in the form of charcoal was made by the same chemistry as it is today, by heating wood in a pyramid covered with clay to exclude air.[136][137]
In 1722,René Antoine Ferchault de Réaumurdemonstrated that iron was transformed into steel through the absorption of some substance, now known to be carbon.[138]In 1772,Antoine Lavoisiershowed that diamonds are a form of carbon; when he burned samples of charcoal and diamond and found that neither produced any water and that both released the same amount of carbon dioxide per gram. In 1779,[139]Carl Wilhelm Scheeleshowed that graphite, which had been thought of as a form of lead, was instead identical with charcoal but with a small admixture of iron, and that it gave "aerial acid" (his name for carbon dioxide) when oxidized with nitric acid.[140]In 1786, the French scientistsClaude Louis Berthollet,Gaspard Mongeand C. A. Vandermonde confirmed that graphite was mostly carbon by oxidizing it in oxygen in much the same way Lavoisier had done with diamond.[141]Some iron again was left, which the French scientists thought was necessary to the graphite structure. In their publication they proposed the namecarbone(Latincarbonum) for the element in graphite which was given off as a gas upon burning graphite. Antoine Lavoisier then listed carbon as an element in his 1789 textbook.[140]
A newallotropeof carbon,fullerene, that was discovered in 1985[142]includesnanostructuredforms such asbuckyballsandnanotubes.[37]Their discoverers –Robert Curl,Harold Kroto, andRichard Smalley– received theNobel Prizein Chemistry in 1996.[143]The resulting renewed interest in new forms led to the discovery of further exotic allotropes, includingglassy carbon, and the realization that "amorphous carbon" is not strictlyamorphous.[44]

## Graphite
Commercially viable natural deposits of graphite occur in many parts of the world, but the most important sources economically are in China, India, Brazil, and North Korea.[144]Graphite deposits are ofmetamorphicorigin, found in association withquartz,mica, andfeldsparsin schists,gneisses, and metamorphosedsandstonesandlimestoneaslensesorveins, sometimes of a metre or more in thickness. Deposits of graphite inBorrowdale,Cumberland, England were at first of sufficient size and purity that, until the 19th century, pencils were made by sawing blocks of natural graphite into strips before encasing the strips in wood. Today, smaller deposits of graphite are obtained by crushing the parent rock and floating the lighter graphite out on water.[145]
There are three types of natural graphite—amorphous, flake or crystalline flake, and vein or lump. Amorphous graphite is the lowest quality and most abundant. Contrary to science, in industry "amorphous" refers to very small crystal size rather than complete lack of crystal structure. Amorphous is used for lower value graphite products and is the lowest priced graphite. Large amorphous graphite deposits are found in China, Europe, Mexico and the United States. Flake graphite is less common and of higher quality than amorphous; it occurs as separate plates that crystallized in metamorphic rock. Flake graphite can be four times the price of amorphous. Good quality flakes can be processed intoexpandable graphitefor many uses, such asflame retardants. The foremost deposits are found in Austria, Brazil, Canada, China, Germany and Madagascar. Vein or lump graphite is the rarest, most valuable, and highest quality type of natural graphite. It occurs in veins along intrusive contacts in solid lumps, and it is only commercially mined in Sri Lanka.[145]
According to theUSGS, world production of natural graphite was 1.1 million tonnes in 2010, to which China contributed 800,000 t, India 130,000 t, Brazil 76,000 t, North Korea 30,000 t and Canada 25,000 t. No natural graphite was reported mined in the United States, but 118,000 t of synthetic graphite with an estimated value of $998 million was produced in 2009.[145]

## Diamond
The diamond supply chain is controlled by a limited number of powerful businesses, and is also highly concentrated in a small number of locations around the world (see figure).[146]
Only a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds. The ore is crushed, during which care has to be taken in order to prevent larger diamonds from being destroyed in this process and subsequently the particles are sorted by density. Today, diamonds are located in the diamond-rich density fraction with the help ofX-ray fluorescence, after which the final sorting steps are done by hand. Before the use ofX-raysbecame commonplace, the separation was done with grease belts; diamonds have a stronger tendency to stick to grease than the other minerals in the ore.[147]
Historically diamonds were known to be found only in alluvial deposits in southern India.[148]India led the world in diamond production from the time of their discovery in approximately the 9th century BC[149]to the mid-18th century AD, but the commercial potential of these sources had been exhausted by the late 18th century and at that time India was eclipsed by Brazil where the first non-Indian diamonds were found in 1725.[150]
Diamond production of primary deposits (kimberlites and lamproites) only started in the 1870s after the discovery of the diamond fields in South Africa. Production has increased over time and an accumulated total of over 4.5 billion carats have been mined since that date.[151]Most commercially viable diamond deposits were in Russia, Botswana, Australia and the Democratic Republic of Congo.[152]By 2005, Russia produced almost one-fifth of the global diamond output (mostly inYakutia territory; for example,Mir pipeandUdachnaya pipe) but theArgyle minein Australia became the single largest source, producing 14 million carats in 2018.[153][154]New finds, the Canadian mines atDiavikandEkati, are expected to become even more valuable owing to their production of gem quality stones.[155]
In the United States, diamonds have been found in Arkansas, Colorado, and Montana.[156]In 2004, a startling discovery of a microscopic diamond in the United States[157]led to the January 2008 bulk-sampling ofkimberlite pipesin a remote part of Montana.[158]
While natural diamonds form over time deep within the Earth,synthetic diamondsare created in laboratories through a variety of methods. The original method uses high pressure and high temperature (HPHT) and is still widely used because of its relatively low cost. The process involves large presses that can weigh hundreds of tons to produce a pressure of 5 GPa (730,000 psi) at 1,500 °C (2,730 °F). The second method, using chemical vapor deposition (CVD), creates a carbonplasmaover a substrate onto which the carbon atoms deposit to form diamond. Other methods include explosive formation (formingdetonation nanodiamonds) andsonicationof graphite solutions.[159][160][161]

## Applications
Carbon is essential to all known living systems, and without it life as we know it could not exist (seealternative biochemistry).[67]The major economic use of carbon other than food and wood is in the form of hydrocarbons, most notably the fossil fuel methane gas and crude oil (petroleum). Crude oil is distilled in refineries by thepetrochemical industryto produce gasoline, kerosene, and other products.[162]Celluloseis a natural, carbon-containing polymer produced by plants in the form of wood, cotton, linen, andhemp. Cellulose is used primarily for maintaining structure in plants.[163]Commercially valuable carbon polymers of animal origin include wool, cashmere, and silk.[164]Plastics are made from synthetic carbon polymers, often with oxygen and nitrogen atoms included at regular intervals in the main polymer chain. The raw materials for many of these synthetic substances come from crude oil and coal.[165][166]
The uses of carbon and its compounds are extremely varied. It can formalloyswith iron, of which the most common iscarbon steel. Graphite is combined with clays to form the 'lead' used in pencils used for writing and drawing. It is also used as a lubricant and a pigment, as a moulding material in glass manufacture, inelectrodesfor dry batteries and inelectroplatingandelectroforming, inbrushesforelectric motors, and as aneutron moderatorinnuclear reactors.[162]
Charcoal is used as a drawing material inartwork, barbecue grilling,iron smelting, and in many other applications. Wood, coal and oil are used as fuel for production of energy and heating.[167][168]Gem quality diamond is used in jewelry, andindustrial diamondsare used in drilling, cutting and polishing tools for machining metals and stone.Carbon fiber, which is produced bypyrolyzingsynthetic polyester fibers, is used to reinforce plastics, creating advanced, lightweight composite materials.[89][169][170]
Carbon fiber is made by pyrolysis of extruded and stretched filaments ofpolyacrylonitrile(PAN) and other organic substances. The crystallographic structure and mechanical properties of the fiber depend on the type of starting material, and on the subsequent processing. Carbon fibers made from PAN have structure resembling narrow filaments of graphite, but thermal processing may re-order the structure into a continuous rolled sheet. The result is fibers with higherspecific tensile strengththan steel.[171]
Carbon blackis used as the black pigment in printing ink, artist's oil paint, and water colours,carbon paper, automotive finishes,India inkandlaser printertoner. Carbon black is also used as a filler in rubber products such as tyres and in plastic compounds.[172][173]Activated charcoalis used as anabsorbentandadsorbentinfiltermaterial in applications as diverse as gas masks, water purification, and kitchenextractor hoods, and in medicine to absorb toxins, poisons, or gases from the digestive system. Carbon is used inchemical reductionat high temperatures.[174][175][176]Cokeis used to reduce iron ore into iron (smelting).Case hardeningof steel is achieved by heating finished steel components in carbon powder.[177][178]Carbidesofsilicon,tungsten,boron, andtitaniumare among the hardest known materials, and are used as abrasives in cutting and grinding tools. Carbon compounds make up most of the materials used in clothing, such as natural and synthetic textiles and leather, and almost all of the interior surfaces in the built environment other than glass, stone, drywall, and metal.[36][67]

## Diamonds
Thediamondindustry falls into two categories: one dealing with gem-grade diamonds and the other, with industrial-grade diamonds. While a large trade in both types of diamonds exists, the two markets function dramatically differently.[89]Unlikeprecious metalssuch as gold or platinum, gem diamonds do not trade as a commodity. There is a substantial mark-up in the sale of diamonds, and there is not a very active market for resale of diamonds.[179]
Industrial diamonds are valued mostly for their hardness and heat conductivity, with the gemological qualities of clarity and color being mostly irrelevant. About 80% of mined diamonds (equal to about 100 million carats or 20 tonnes annually) are unsuitable for use as gemstones and relegated for industrial use (known asbort).[180]Synthetic diamonds, invented in the 1950s, found almost immediate industrial applications; 3 billion carats (600tonnes) of synthetic diamond is produced annually.[181]
The dominant industrial use of diamond is in cutting, drilling, grinding, and polishing. Most of these applications do not require large diamonds; in fact, most diamonds of gem-quality except for their small size can be used industrially. Diamonds are embedded in drill tips or saw blades, or ground into a powder for use in grinding and polishing applications.[182]Specialized applications include use in laboratories as containment forhigh-pressure experiments(seediamond anvil cell), high-performancebearings, and limited use in specialized windows.[183][184]With the continuing advances in the production of synthetic diamonds, new applications are becoming feasible. Garnering much excitement is the possible use of diamond as asemiconductorsuitable formicrochips, and because of its exceptional heat conductance property, as aheat sinkin electronics.[185]

## Precautions
Pure carbon has extremely low toxicity to humans and can be handled safely in the form of graphite or charcoal. It is resistant to dissolution or chemical attack, even in the acidic contents of the digestive tract. Consequently, once it enters into the body's tissues it is likely to remain there indefinitely. Carbon black was probably one of the first pigments to be used for tattooing, andÖtzi the Icemanwas found to have carbon tattoos that survived during his life and for 5200 years after his death.[187]Inhalation of coal dust or soot (carbon black) in large quantities can be dangerous, irritating lung tissues and causing the congestive lung disease,coalworker's pneumoconiosis. Diamond dust used as an abrasive can be harmful if ingested or inhaled. Microparticles of carbon are produced in diesel engine exhaust fumes, and may accumulate in the lungs.[188]However, in these examples, the harm may result from contaminants (e.g., organic chemicals, heavy metals) rather than from the carbon itself.[189]
Carbon may burn vigorously and brightly in the presence of air at high temperatures. Large accumulations of coal, which have remained inert for hundreds of millions of years in the absence of oxygen, mayspontaneously combustwhen exposed to air in coal mine waste tips, ship cargo holds and coal bunkers,[190][191]and storage dumps.[192]
In nuclear applications where graphite is used as aneutron moderator, accumulation ofWigner energyfollowed by a sudden, spontaneous release may occur.Annealingto at least 250 °C can release the energy safely, although in theWindscale firethe procedure went wrong, causing other reactor materials to combust.[193][194]
The great variety of carbon compounds include such lethal poisons astetrodotoxin, thelectinricinfrom seeds of thecastor oil plantRicinus communis,cyanide(CN−), and carbon monoxide; and such essentials to life as glucose and protein.[67]