## Cell (biology)
Thecellis the basic structural and functional unit of allforms of lifeororganisms. The term comes from theLatinwordcellulameaning 'small room'. A biological cell basically consists of asemipermeablecell membraneenclosingcytoplasmthat contains genetic material. Most cells are only visible under amicroscope. Except for highly-differentiatedcell types (examples includered blood cellsandgametes) most cells are capable ofreplication, andprotein synthesis. Some types of cell aremotile. Cellsemerged on Earthabout four billion years ago.
All organisms are grouped intoprokaryotes, andeukaryotes. Prokaryotes aresingle-celledand includearchaeaandbacteria. Eukaryotes can be single-celled ormulticellular, and includeprotists,plants,animals, most species offungi, and some species ofalgae. All multicellular organisms are made up of many differenttypes of cell. Thediploid cellsthat make up the body of aplantoranimalare known assomatic cells, which excludes thehaploidgametes.
Prokaryotes lack amembrane-boundnucleusand have anucleoidinstead. In eukaryotic cells, the nucleus is enclosed in thenuclear membrane. Eukaryotic cells contain othermembrane-bound organellessuch asmitochondria, which provide energy for cell functions, andchloroplasts, in plants that create sugars byphotosynthesis. Othernon-membrane-bound organellesmay beproteinaceous, such as theribosomespresent (though different) in both groups. A unique membrane-boundprokaryotic organelle, themagnetosomehas been discovered inmagnetotactic bacteria.
Cells were discovered byRobert Hookein 1665, who named them after their resemblance tocellsin amonastery.Cell theory, developed in 1839 byMatthias Jakob SchleidenandTheodor Schwann, states that all organisms are composed of one or more cells, that cells are the fundamental unit of structure and function in all organisms, and that all cells come from pre-existing cells.

## Types
Organisms are broadly grouped intoeukaryotesandprokaryotes. Eukaryotic cells possess amembrane-boundnucleus, andprokaryotic cellslack a nucleus but have anucleoidregion.[1]Prokaryotes aresingle-celled organisms, whereas eukaryotes can be either single-celled ormulticellular. Single-celled eukaryotes includemicroalgaesuch asdiatoms. Multicellular eukaryotes include allanimals, andplants, mostfungi, and some species ofalgae.[2][3][4]

## Prokaryotes
Allprokaryotesare single-celled and includebacteriaandarchaea, two of thethreedomains of life.[7]Prokaryotic cells were likely the first form oflifeon Earth,[8]characterized by having vitalbiological processesincludingcell signaling. They are simpler and smaller than eukaryotic cells, lack anucleus, and the other usually presentmembrane-bound organelles.[9]Prokaryotic organellesare less complex, and are typicallymembrane-less.[10]All prokaryotic cellssecretedifferent substances from their membranes, includingexoenzymes, andextracellular polymeric substances.
Most prokaryotes are the smallest of all organisms, ranging from 0.5 to 2.0 μm in diameter.[11]The largest bacterium known,Thiomargarita magnifica, is visible to the naked eye with an average length of1 cm, but can be as much as2 cm[12][13]

## Bacteria
Bacteria are enclosed in acell envelope, that protects the interior from the exterior.[14]It generally consists of aplasma membranecovered by acell wallwhich, for some bacteria, is covered by a third gelatinous layer called abacterial capsule.  The capsule may bepolysaccharideas inpneumococci,meningococciorpolypeptideasBacillus anthracisorhyaluronic acidas instreptococci.Mycoplasmaonly possess the cell membrane.[15]The cell envelope gives rigidity to the cell and separates the interior of the cell from its environment, serving as a protective mechanical and chemical filter.[16]The cell wall consists ofpeptidoglycanand acts as an additional barrier against exterior forces.[17][16]The cell wall acts to protect the cell mechanically and chemically from its environment, and is an additional layer of protection to the cell membrane. It also prevents the cell from expanding and bursting (cytolysis) fromosmotic pressuredue to ahypotonicenvironment.[18]
TheDNAof a bacterium typically consists of a singlecircular chromosomethat is in direct contact with thecytoplasmin a region called thenucleoid. Some bacteria contain multiple circular or evenlinear chromosomes.[19][20][21]The cytoplasm also containsribosomesand various inclusions wheretranscriptiontakes place alongsidetranslation.[22][23]Extrachromosomal DNAasplasmids, are usually circular and encode additional genes, such as those ofantibiotic resistance.[24]Linear bacterial plasmids have been identified in several species ofspirochetebacteria, including species ofBorreliawhich causes Lyme disease.[25]Theprokaryotic cytoskeletonin bacteria is involved in the maintenance of cell shape,polarityand cytokinesis.[26]
Compartmentalizationis a key feature of eukaryotic cells but some species of bacteria, have protein-based organelle-likemicrocompartmentssuch asgas vesicles, andcarboxysomes, andencapsulin nanocompartments.[27][28][29][30]Certain membrane-boundprokaryotic organelleshave also been discovered. They include themagnetosomeofmagnetotactic bacteria,[28]and theanammoxosomeofanammoxbacteria.[31][32]
Cell-surface appendagescan includeflagella, andpili, protein structures that facilitate movement and communication between cells.[33]The flagellum stretches from the cytoplasm through the cell membrane and extrudes through the cell wall.[34]Fimbriaeare short attachment pili, the other type of pilus is the longerconjugative type.[35]Fimbriae are formed of anantigenicprotein calledpilin, and are responsible for the attachment of bacteria to specific receptors on host cells.[36]

## Archaea
Archaea are enclosed in a cell envelope consisting of a plasma membrane and a cell wall.
An exception to this is theThermoplasmathat only has the cell membrane.[15]The cell membranes of archaea are unique, consisting ofether-linked lipids. Theprokaryotic cytoskeletonhas homologues of eukaryoticactinandtubulin.[26]A unique form of metabolism in the archaean ismethanogenesis. Theircell-surface appendageequivalent of the flagella is the differently structured and uniquearchaellum.[37][35]The DNA is contained in a circular chromosome in direct contact with the cytoplasm, in a region known as the nucleoid. Ribosomes are also found freely in the cytoplasm, or attached to the cell membrane where DNA processing takes place.[22][38]
The archaea are noted for theirextremophilespecies, and many are selectively evolved to thrive in extreme heat, cold, acidic, alkaline, or high salt conditions.[39]There are no known archaean pathogens.[40]

## Eukaryotes
Eukaryotes can be single-celled, as indiatoms(microscopic algae), or multicellular, as inanimals,plants, mostfungi, and somealgae.[41]Multicellular organismsare made up of many differenttypes of cellknown overall assomatic cells.[42]Eukaryotes are distinguished by the presence of a membrane-boundnucleus.[43]The nucleus gives the eukaryote its name, which means "true nut" or "true kernel", where "nut" means the nucleus.[44]A eukaryotic cell can be 2 to 100 times larger in diameter than a typical prokaryotic cell.[45]
Eukaryotic cells have acell membranethat surrounds a gel-likecytoplasm. The cytoplasm contains thecytoskeleton, and surrounds the cell nucleus, the endoplasmic reticulum, ribosomes, the Golgi apparatus, mitochondria,lysosomes,peroxisomes,endosomes, vacuoles and vesicles, and may have a cell wall, chloroplasts,vaults, andcell-surface appendages. There are many cell variations among the different eukaryote groups.
The membranes of most of the organelles including the cell membrane are sometimes referred to as theendomembrane system.[46]All of these membranes are involved in thesecretoryandendocyticpathways, modifying, packaging, and transporting proteins and lipids to and from the trans-Golgi network.[47]Inmammaliancells, endocytosis includesearly,late, andrecyclingendosomes.[47]
Most distinct cell types arise from a singletotipotentcell, called azygote, thatdifferentiatesinto hundreds of different cell types during the course ofdevelopment. Differentiation of cells is driven by different environmental cues (such as cell–cell interaction) and intrinsic differences (such as those caused by the uneven distribution ofmoleculesduringdivision).[48]
Eukaryotic cell types include those that make upanimals,plants,fungi,algae, andprotists. All of which have many different species and cell differences. A separate grouping of animals and fungi are known asopisthokonts.

## Animal cells
All the cells in an animal body develop from onetotipotentdiploid cellcalled azygote. During theembryonic developmentof ananimal, the cellsdifferentiateinto the specialisedtissuesandorgansof the organism. Different groups of cells differentiate from thegerm layers. Thespongehas only one layer. Some other animals known asdiploblastshave two germ layers theectoderm, and theendoderm. More advanced animals have an extra layer, the middlemesodermallayer, and are known astriploblastic. Triploblastic animals make up the largecladeofBilateria. Differentiation results in structural or functional changes tostem cells, andprogenitor cells.
The ectoderm gives rise to several different types ofepithelial tissuesincluding theskin, andglands, and to thenervous tissue. Epithelium asmesotheliumforms the lining of many organs, andinner cavities.[49]Epithelial cells are joined together in sheets by way ofcell junctions;adherens junctions, anddesmosomesbind the cells together, andhemidesmosomesbind the cells to thebasement membrane. All three types are linked to the cell cytoskeleton.[50]
There are an estimated 200 differentcell typesin the human body. The estimatedcell countin a typical adult human body is around 30 trillion cells, 36 trillion in an adult male, and 28 trillion in a female.[51]

## Structure
An animal cell has acell membranethat surrounds a gel-likecytoplasm. The cytoplasm contains thecytoskeleton, the cell nucleus, the endoplasmic reticulum, ribosomes, the Golgi apparatus, mitochondria,lysosomes,peroxisomes,endosomes, vacuoles and vesicles, andvaults. An animal cell structure, as other eukaryotes, includes anendomembrane systemencompassing the cell membrane, and all the membranes of the organelles excluding those of the mitochondria.The whole system cooperates in the modification, packaging, and transport of proteins and lipids.[46]

## Cell membrane
Thecell membrane, or plasma membrane, is aselectively permeablemembraneas an outer boundary of the cell that encloses the cytoplasm.[52]The membrane serves to separate and protect a cell from its surrounding environment and is made mostly from alipid bilayerofphospholipids, which areamphiphilic(partlyhydrophobicand partlyhydrophilic). It has been best described in thefluid mosaic model.[53]Embedded within the cell membrane aresecretorymacromolecularlipoproteinstructures calledporosomes;[54]and a number of different channels and pumps involved inactively transportingmolecules into and out of the cell.[22]The membrane is semi-permeable, and selectively permeable, in that it can either let a substance (moleculeorion) pass through freely, to a limited extent or not at all.[55]Cell surface receptorsin the membrane allow cells to detect external signaling molecules such ashormones.[56]
Underlying, and attached to the cell membrane is thecell cortex, the outermost part of the actin cytoskeleton.[57]

## Cytoplasm
The cell membrane encloses thecytoplasmof the cell that surrounds all of the cell's organelles.[58]It is made up of two main components, thecytoskeletonmade up ofprotein filaments, and thecytosol.[58]The network of filaments and microtubules of the cytoskeleton gives shape and support to the cell, and has a part in organising the cell components.
The cytosol is a gel-like substance made up of water, ions, and non-essential biomolecules, and is the main site ofprotein synthesis, anddegradation.[58]The acidity (pH) of the cytosol is near neutral, and is regulated by transporters in the cell membrane. Different proteins in the cytoplasm operate optimally at different pHs.[59]The cytosol forms30%–50%of the cell's volume.[60]

## Cytoskeleton
Thecytoskeletonacts to organize and maintain the cell's shape; anchors organelles in place; helps duringendocytosis, and in the uptake of external materials by a cell.The cytoskeleton is composed ofmicrotubules,intermediate filamentsandmicrofilaments. There are a great number of proteins associated with them, each controlling a cell's structure by directing, bundling, and aligning filaments. The outermost part of the cytoskeleton is thecell cortex, oractincortex, a thin layer of cross-linkedactomyosins.[57]Its thickness varies with cell type and physiology.[57]It directs the transport through theERand theGolgi apparatus.[61]The cytoskeleton in the animal cell also plays a part incytokinesis, in the formation of thespindle apparatusduringcell division, the separation of daughter cells.

## Organelles
Organellesarecompartmentsof the cell that are specialized for carrying out one or more functions, analogous to theorgans, such as the heart, and lungs.[22]There are several types of organelles held in the cytoplasm. Most organelles are membrane-bound, and vary in size and number based on the growth of the host cell.[62]Organelles include the nucleus, mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, vesicles, and vacuoles.Membrane-less organellesinclude the centrosome, typically the ribosome,[63]andvaults.[64]

## Nucleus
Thecell nucleusis the largest organelle in the animal cell.[51]It houses the cell'schromosomes, and is the place where almost allDNAreplication andRNAsynthesis (transcription) occur. The nucleus is spherical and separated from the cytoplasm by a double-membranednuclear envelope. A space between the membranes is called the perinuclear space. The nuclear envelope isolates and protects a cell's DNA from various molecules that could accidentally damage its structure or interfere with its processing. During processing,DNAistranscribed, or copied into a specialRNA, calledmessenger RNA(mRNA). This mRNA is then transported out of the nucleus, where it is translated into a specific protein molecule. Thenucleolusis a specializedbiomolecular condensatewithin the nucleus where ribosome subunits are assembled. It is one of several types of membrane-lessnuclear bodies.[22]Cells use DNA for their long-term information storage that isencodedin itsDNA sequence.[22]RNA is used for information transport (e.g.,mRNA) andenzymaticfunctions (e.g.,ribosomalRNA).Transfer RNA(tRNA) molecules are used to add amino acids during proteintranslation.[65]
TheDNAof each cell is its genetic material, and is organized in multiple linear molecules, calledchromosomes, that are coiled aroundhistoneproteinsand housed in thecell nucleus.[43][66]In humans, the nuclear genome is divided into 46 linear chromosomes, including 22homologous chromosomepairs and a pair ofsex chromosomes. 
The nucleus is amembrane-bound organelle.[67]

## Endoplasmic reticulum
Theendoplasmic reticulum(ER) is a transport network for molecules targeted for certain modifications and specific destinations, as compared to molecules that float freely in the cytoplasm. The ER has two forms: therough endoplasmic reticulum(RER), which hasribosomeson its surface that secrete proteins into the ER, and thesmooth endoplasmic reticulum(SER), which lacks ribosomes.[22]The smooth ER plays a role in calcium sequestration and release, and helps in synthesis oflipid.[68]

## Golgi apparatus
TheGolgi apparatusprocesses and packagesproteins, andlipids, that are synthesized by the cell. It is organized as a stack of plate-like structures known ascisternae.[69]

## Mitochondria
Mitochondriaare self-replicating double membrane-bound organelles that occur in various numbers, shapes, and sizes in the cytoplasm of the cell.[22]Aerobic respirationin the mitochondria generates the cell's energy byoxidative phosphorylation, usingoxygento release energy stored in cellular nutrients (typically pertaining toglucose) to generateadenosine triphosphate(ATP).[70]Mitochondria are descended from bacteria that formed anendosymbioticrelationship with ancient prokaryotes.[71]Mitochondria multiply bybinary fission[72]and have their own DNA contained in multiple small circular chromosomes.[73][74]The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is very small compared tonuclear DNA,[22]but it codes for 13 proteins involved in mitochondrial energy production and specifictransfer RNAs(tRNAs).[75]Mitochondria also have their own ribosomes known asmitoribosomes.[76]

## Lysosomes
Alysosomeis the most acidic compartment in the cell.[77]It contains over 60 differenthydrolytic enzymesthat need an acidic environment.[78]They digest excess or worn-out organelles, food particles, and engulfedvirusesorbacteria. The cell could not house these destructive enzymes if they were not contained in a membrane-bound compartment.[22][79]

## Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes, aremicrobodiesbounded by a single membrane. A peroxisome has no DNA or ribosomes and the proteins that it needs are encoded in the nucleus, and selectively imported from the cytosol. Some proteins enter via the endomembrane reticulum.[80]They have enzymes that rid the cell of toxicperoxides. The enzymatic content of the peroxisomes varies widely across the species, as it can in an individual organism.[81][80]The peroxisomes in animal cells are concentrated in theliver cellsandadipocytes.[81]

## Vacuoles
Vacuolessequester waste products. Some cells, most notablyAmoeba, have contractile vacuoles, which can pump water out of the cell if there is too much water.[82]

## Centrosome
Thecentrosomeis a membrane-less organelle composed ofpericentriolar materialand the twocentrioles.[83][63]The centrosome is the mainmicrotubule organizing centerin the animal cell that  produces themicrotubuleskey components of the cytoskeleton. Centrosomes are composed of twocentrioleswhich lie perpendicular to each other in which each has an organization like acartwheel, which separate duringcell divisionand help in the formation of themitotic spindle.[84]

## Ribosomes
Aribosomeis a large complex ofRNAandproteinmolecules often considered as anon-membrane-bound organelle.[22]They each consist of two subunits, one larger than the other, and act as an assembly line wheremessenger RNAfrom the nucleus is used tosynthesise proteinsfrom amino acids.Eukaryotic ribosomesare often bound to, and give the name to theroughtype ofendoplasmic reticulum, but they are also found freely floating in the cytoplasm.[22]

## Vaults
Avaultis a large ribonuclear protein particle, anon-membrane-bound organelle, three times the size of a ribosome but with only three proteins in contrast to the near hundred in the ribosome.[64]Most human cells have around 10,000 vaults, and in some types ofimmune cellthere may be up to 100,000.Macrophageshave the greatest number of vaults of any human cell.[85]Vaults are largely overlooked because their functions are purely speculative. They may play a role in transport from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, and may serve as scaffolds for signal transduction proteins. They are present in normal tissues, and more so in secretory and excretory epithelial cells.[64][85]

## Animal cell types
Some types of specialised cell are localised to a particular animal group.Vertebratesfor example have specialised, structurally changed cells includingmuscle cells. The cell membrane of askeletal muscle cellor of acardiac muscle cellis termed thesarcolemma.[86]And the cytoplasm is termed thesarcoplasm. Skeletal muscle cells also becomemultinucleated. Populations of animal groupsevolve to become distinct species, where sexual reproduction is isolated. The manyspeciesof vertebrates for example have other unique characteristics by way of additional specialised cells. In some species ofelectric fishfor example modified muscle cells or nerve cells have specialised to becomeelecterocytescapable of creating and storing electrical energy for future release, as in stunning prey, or use inelectrolocation.[87]These are large flat cells in theelectric eel, andelectric rayin which thousands are stacked into anelectric organcomparable to avoltaic pile.[88]
Many animal cells areciliatedand most cells except red blood cells haveprimary cilia. Primary cilia play important roles inchemosensationandmechanosensation.[89][90]Each cilium may be "viewed as a sensory cellularantennaethat coordinates a large number of cellular signaling pathways, sometimes coupling the signaling to ciliary motility or alternatively to cell division and differentiation."[91]The cilia in other cells are motile organelles, and in therespiratory epitheliumplay an important role in themovement of mucus. In the reproductive system ciliated epithelium in thefallopian tubesmove the egg from the uterus to the ovary. Motile cilia also known as flagella, drive the sperm cells.[92]Invertebrateplanarianshave ciliated excretoryflame cells.[93]Other excretory cells also found in planarians aresolenocytesthat are long and flagellated.

## Plant cells
Plant cells havecell wallscomposed ofcellulose,hemicelluloses, andpectinthat are constructed outside thecell membrane. Insclerenchymatissueligninis secreted to form a secondary wall inside the primary cell wall.[94]Cutinis secreted outside the primary cell wall and into the outer layers of the secondary cell wall of the epidermal cells of leaves, stems and other above-ground organs to form theplant cuticle.[citation needed]Cell walls perform many essential functions, they provide shape to form the tissue and organs of the plant, and play an important role in intercellular communication and plant-microbe interactions.[citation needed]Specialized cell-to-cell communication pathways known asplasmodesmata, occur in the form of pores in the primary cell wall through which the cell membrane andendoplasmic reticulumof adjacent cells are continuous.[citation needed]
Organelles inplant cells, includepigment-containingplastids, especiallychloroplaststhat containchlorophyll(also found inalgae), water-storagevacuoles, and two types of peroxisome. Chloroplasts capture the sun's energy to make carbohydrates throughphotosynthesis.[95]Chromoplastscontain fat-solublecarotenoidpigments such as orangecaroteneand yellowxanthophyllswhich helps in synthesis and storage.Leucoplastsare non-pigmented plastids and helps in storage of nutrients.[96]Plastids divide by binary fission.[97]The vacuoles are larger than those in animal cells, and their membrane transports ions against concentration gradients.[98][99]One type of peroxisome is in the leaves where it takes part inphotorespiration. The other type is in germinating seeds where it takes part in the conversion of fatty acids into sugars for the plant's growth.[80]In this peroxisome type the enzymatic content is so different from other groups that it has an alternative name ofglyoxysome. The enzymes are of theglyoxylate cycle.[81]
The plant cytoskeleton is a dynamic structure that has a scaffold of microtubules and microfilaments, but no intermediate filaments.[100]Themicrotubule organizing centerin plant cells is often sited underneath the cell membrane where nucleated microtubules often form sheet-like semi-parallel arrays.[101]
Plant hormonesare produced by all plant cells.Different hormonesact assignaling moleculesto control all aspects of the plant's growth and development including embryogenesis and reproduction, and in pathogen defence.[102][103][104]

## Algal cells
Algaemembers arephotoautotrophsable to usephotosynthesisto produce energy. Photosynthesis is made possible by the use ofplastids, organelles in the cytoplasm known aschloroplasts. Algal photoautotrophs includered algae.[105]
Alginateis apolysaccharidefound in the matrix of the cell walls ofbrown algae, and has many important uses in the food industry, and inpharmacology.[106]

## Fungal cells
The cells offungihave in addition to the shared eukaryotic organelles aspitzenkörperin their endomembrane system, associated withhyphal tip growth. It is aphase-dark body that is composed of an aggregation of membrane-bound vesicles containing cell wall components, serving as a point of assemblage and release of such components intermediate between the Golgi and the cell membrane. The spitzenkörper is motile and generates new hyphal tip growth as it moves forward.[107]
The cell walls of fungi are uniquely made of achitin-glucan complex.[108]

## Protist cells
The cells ofprotistsmay be bounded only by acell membrane, or may in addition have acell wall, or may be covered by apellicle(inciliates), atest(intestate amoebae), or afrustule(indiatoms).
Some protists such asamoebaemayfeed on other organismsand ingest food byphagocytosis. Vacuoles known asphagosomesin the cytoplasm may be used to draw in and incorporate the captured particles. Other types of protists arephotoautotrophs, providing themselves with energy by photosynthesis.[109]Most single-celled protists are motile, andgenerate movementwith cilia, flagella, orpseudopodia.[110]
Ciliateshave two different sorts ofnuclei: a tiny,diploidmicronucleus(the "generative nucleus", which carries thegermlineof the cell), and a large,ampliploidmacronucleus(the "vegetative nucleus", which takes care of general cell regulation.[111][112]

## Replication
Duringcell division, a single cell, themother celldivides into two daughter cells. This leads to the growth oftissueinmulticellular organisms.Prokaryoticcells divide bybinary fission, whileeukaryoticcells usually undergo a process of nuclear division, calledmitosis, followed by division of the cell, calledcytokinesis. Adiploidcell may undergomeiosisto produce haploid cells, usually four.Haploidcells serve asgametesin multicellular organisms, fusing to form new diploid cells.[citation needed]
DNA replication, or the process of duplicating a cell's genome,[22]always happens when a cell divides through mitosis or binary fission.[citation needed]This occurs during theS (synthesis) phaseof thecell cycle.[113]
In meiosis, the DNA is replicated only once, while the cell divides twice. DNA replication only occurs beforemeiosis I. DNA replication does not occur when the cells divide the second time, inmeiosis II.[114]Replication, like all cellular activities, requires specialized proteins.[22]

## Signaling
Cell signaling is the process by which a cell interacts with itself, other cells, and the environment. Typically, the signaling process involves three components: the first messenger (the ligand), thereceptor, and the signal itself.[115]Most cell signaling is chemical in nature, and can occur with neighboring cells or more distant targets. Signal receptors are complex proteins or tightly bound multimer of proteins,located in the plasma membraneorwithin the interior.[116]
Each cell is programmed to respond to specific extracellular signal molecules, and this process is the basis ofdevelopment,tissue repair,immunity, andhomeostasis. Individual cells are able to manage receptor sensitivity including turning them off, and receptors can become less sensitive when they are occupied for long durations.[116]Errors in signaling interactions may cause diseases such ascancer,autoimmunity, anddiabetes.[117]

## Protein targeting
Protein targetingor protein sorting is thebiological mechanismby whichproteinsare transported to their appropriate destinations within or outside the cell.[118][119]
Proteins can be targeted to the inner space of anorganelle, different intracellularmembranes, theplasma membrane, or to the exterior of the cell viasecretion.[118][119]Information contained in the protein itself directs this delivery process.[119][120]Correct sorting is crucial for the cell; errors or dysfunction in sorting have been linked to multiple diseases.[119][121][122]

## DNA repair
All cells contain enzyme systems that scan forDNA damageand carry outrepair. Diverse repair processes have evolved in all organisms. Repair is vital to maintain DNA integrity, avoid cell death and errors of replication that could lead tomutation. Repair processes includenucleotide excision repair,DNA mismatch repair,non-homologous end joiningof double-strand breaks,recombinational repairand light-dependent repair (photoreactivation).[123]

## Growth and metabolism
Between successive cell divisions, cells grow through the functioning of cellular metabolism. Cell metabolism is the process by which individual cells process nutrient molecules. Metabolism has two distinct divisions:catabolism, in which the cell breaks down complex molecules to produce energy andreducing power, andanabolism, in which the cell uses energy and reducing power to construct complex molecules and perform other biological functions.[124]
Complex sugars can be broken down into simpler sugar molecules calledmonosaccharidessuch asglucose. Once inside the cell, glucose is broken down to make adenosine triphosphate (ATP),[22]a molecule that possesses readily available energy, through two different pathways. In plant cells,chloroplastscreate sugars byphotosynthesis, using the energy of light to join molecules of water andcarbon dioxide.[125]

## Protein synthesis
Cells are capable ofsynthesizing new proteins, which are essential for the modulation and maintenance of cellular activities. This process involves the formation of new protein molecules fromamino acidbuilding blocks based on information encoded in DNA/RNA. Protein synthesis generally consists of two major steps:transcriptionandtranslation.[65]
Transcription is the process where genetic information in DNA is used to produce a complementary RNA strand. This RNA strand is then processed to givemessenger RNA(mRNA), which is free to migrate into the cytoplasm. mRNA molecules bind to protein-RNA complexes calledribosomeslocated in thecytosol, where they are translated into polypeptide sequences. The ribosome mediates the formation of a polypeptide sequence based on the mRNA sequence. The mRNA sequence directly relates to the polypeptide sequence by binding totransfer RNA(tRNA) adapter molecules in binding pockets within the ribosome.[65]The new polypeptide chain  then folds into a functionalthree-dimensional protein molecule.

## Motility
Unicellular organisms can move in order to find food or escape predators. Common mechanisms of motion includeflagellaandcilia,[35]and the projection ofpseudopodiainamoeboid movement. Cells in multicellular organisms can move during processes such aswound healing, the immune response, andcancer metastasis. In wound healing in animals,white blood cellsmove to the wound site to kill thepathogenscausing infection. Cell motility involves many receptors, crosslinking, bundling, binding, adhesion, motor and other proteins.[126]The process is divided into three steps: protrusion of the leading edge of the cell, adhesion of the leading edge and de-adhesion at the cell body and rear, and cytoskeletal contraction to pull the cell forward. Each step is driven by physical forces generated by unique segments of the cytoskeleton.[127][126]

## Navigation, control and communication
In August 2020, scientists described one way cells—in particular cells of a slime mold and mouse pancreatic cancer-derived cells—are able tonavigateefficiently through a body and identify the best routes through complex mazes: generating gradients after breaking down diffusedchemoattractantswhich enable them to sense upcoming maze junctions before reaching them, including around corners.[128][129][130]

## Cell death
Cell deathoccurs when a cell ceases to carry out its functions, as a result of ageing, or types ofcell injury(necrosis).Programmed cell death, includingapoptosis, andautophagyis a natural process of replacing dead cells with new ones.[131][132]
A separate mode of cellular death is known as amitotic catastrophe, which occurs duringmitosis, following the improper progression of, or entrance to thecell cycle. This mechanism operates to prevent genomic instability.[133][134]Other cell death pathways are described, and includeanoikis,pyroptosis, mitoptosis,parthanatos, andnecroptosis.[135]

## Origins
The origin of cells has to do with theorigin of life, which began thehistory of lifeon Earth. Small molecules needed for life may have been carried to Earth on meteorites, created atdeep-sea vents, orsynthesized by lightning in a reducing atmosphere. There is little experimental data defining what the first self-replicating forms were.RNAmay have beenthe earliest self-replicating molecule, as it can both store genetic information and catalyze chemical reactions.[136]This process required an enzyme tocatalyzethe RNA reactions, which may have been the earlypeptidesthat formed inhydrothermal vents.[137]
Cells emerged around 4 billion years ago.[138][139]The first cells were most likelyheterotrophs. The early cell membranes were probably simpler and more permeable than later ones, with only a single fatty acid chain per lipid. Lipids spontaneously form bilayeredvesiclesin water, and could have preceded RNA.[140][141]
Eukaryoticcells were created some 2.2 billion years ago in a process calledeukaryogenesis. This is widely agreed to have involvedsymbiogenesis, in which anarchaeanand abacteriumcame together to create thefirst eukaryotic common ancestor.[142]It evolved into a population of single-celled organisms that included thelast eukaryotic common ancestor, gaining capabilities along the way.[143][144]
This cell had a new level of complexity, with a nucleus[145][143]and facultatively aerobicmitochondria.[142]It featured at least onecentrioleandcilium, sex (meiosisandsyngamy),peroxisomes, and a dormantcystwith a cell wall ofchitinand/orcellulose.[146][144]The last eukaryotic common ancestor gave rise to the eukaryotes'crown group, containing the ancestors ofanimals,fungi,plants, and a diverse range of single-celled organisms.[147][148]Thegreen plantswere created around 1.6 billion years ago with a second episode of symbiogenesis that addedchloroplasts, derived fromcyanobacteria.[142]

## Multicellularity
Multicellular behavior is demonstrated bymicroorganismsthat areclonedfrom a single cell and form visiblemicrobial colonies. Amicrobial consortiumof two or more species can form abiofilmby the secretion ofextracellular polymeric substances(EPSs).[149]Slime moldsconsist of different groups of microorganisms grouped together in a multicellular-like fashion.
The first evidence of multicellularity in an organism comes fromcyanobacteria-like organisms that lived between 3 and 3.5 billion years ago.[150]Cyanobacteria are variable in morphology,filamentous formsexhibit functional cell differentiation such asheterocysts(for nitrogen fixation),akinetes(resting stage cells), andhormogonia(reproductive, motile filaments). These, together with the intercellular connections they possess, are considered the first signs of multicellularity.[151]
Multicellularity was made possible by the development of theextracellular matrix(ECM) similar in function to the bacterial EPS that consists of extracellular polymeric substances.[152]EPS enables microbial cell adhesion, and is believed to be the first evolutionary step toward multicellular organisms.[153]Basement membranesare a type of specialized extracellular matrix that surrounds mostanimal tissues, and are essential in their formation.[154]Extracellular matrix components oflaminindomains, integrated with other proteins such ascadherinshave been described in single-celled motilechoanoflagellatesthat pre-dates the evolutionary emergence of basement membranes, one of the two types of ECM.[155]The emergence of the basement membrane coincided with the origin of multicellularity.[154][156]The other type of ECM is theinterstial matrix.
The evolution of multicellularity from unicellular ancestors has been replicated in the laboratory, inevolution experimentsusing predation as theselective pressure.[150]

## History of research
In 1665,Robert Hookeexamined a thin slice of cork under hismicroscope, and saw a structure of small enclosures. He wrote "I could exceeding plainly perceive it to be all perforated and porous, much like ahoneycomb, but that the pores of it were not regular".[157]To further support his theory,Matthias SchleidenandTheodor Schwannstudied cells of both animal and plants. What they discovered were significant differences between the two types of cells. This put forth the idea that cells were fundamental to both plants and animals.[158]