## Copper
Copperis achemical element; it hassymbolCu(fromLatincuprum) andatomic number29. It is a soft, malleable, andductilemetal with very highthermalandelectrical conductivity. A freshly exposed surface of pure copper has apinkish-orange color. Copper is used as a conductor of heat and electricity, as abuilding material, and as a constituent of various metalalloys, such assterling silverused injewelry,cupronickelused to make marine hardware andcoins, andconstantanused instrain gaugesandthermocouplesfor temperature measurement.
Copper is one of the fewnative metals, meaning metals that occur naturally in a directly usable, unalloyed metallic form. This led to very early human use in several regions, fromc.8000 BC. Thousands of years later, it was the first metal to besmeltedfrom sulfide ores,c.5000 BC; the first metal to be cast into a shape in a mold,c.4000 BC; and the first metal to be purposely alloyed with another metal,tin, to createbronze,c.3500 BC.[11]
Commonly encountered compounds are copper(II) salts, which often impart blue or green colors to such minerals asazurite,malachite, andturquoise, and have been used widely and historically as pigments.
Copper used in buildings, usually for roofing, oxidizes to form a greenpatinaof compounds calledverdigris. Copper is sometimes used indecorative art, both in its elemental metal form and in compounds as pigments. Copper compounds are used asbacteriostatic agents,fungicides, andwood preservatives.
Copper is essential to allaerobic organisms.  It is particularly associated with oxygen metabolism. For example, it is found in the respiratory enzyme complexcytochrome c oxidase, in the oxygen carryinghemocyanin, and in severalhydroxylases.[12]Adult humans contain between 1.4 and 2.1 mg of copper per kilogram of body weight.[13]

## Etymology
The name of the metal derives fromaes cypriummeaning "metal ofCyprus" in Latin. InLate Latinthis becamecuprum.Old Englishadopted this asCoperandcopper, first used in the 12th century, derives from that word.[14]

## Physical
Copper,silver, andgoldare ingroup 11of the periodic table; these three metals have one s-orbital electron on top of a filled d-electron shelland are characterized by highductilityand electrical and thermal conductivity. The filled d-shells in these elements contribute little to interatomic interactions, which are dominated by the s-electrons throughmetallic bonds. Unlike metals with incomplete d-shells, metallic bonds in copper are lacking acovalentcharacter and are relatively weak. This observation explains the lowhardnessand high ductility ofsingle crystalsof copper.[15]At the macroscopic scale, introduction of extended defects to thecrystal lattice, such as grain boundaries, hinders flow of the material under applied stress, thereby increasing its hardness. For this reason, copper is usually supplied in a fine-grainedpolycrystallineform, which has greater strength than monocrystalline forms.[16]
The softness of copper partly explains its high electrical conductivity (59.6×106S/m) and high thermal conductivity, second highest (second only to silver) among pure metals at room temperature.[17]This is because the resistivity to electron transport in metals at room temperature originates primarily from scattering of electrons on thermal vibrations of the lattice, which are relatively weak in a soft metal.[15]
Copper is one of a few metallic elements with a natural color other than gray or silver.[18]Pure copper is orange-red and acquires a reddishtarnishwhen exposed to air. This is due to the lowplasma frequencyof the metal, which lies in the red part of the visible spectrum, causing it to absorb the higher-frequency green and blue colors.[19]
As with other metals, if copper is put in contact with another metal in the presence of anelectrolyte,galvanic corrosionwill occur.[20]

## Chemical
Copper does not react with water, but it does slowly react with atmospheric oxygen to form a layer of brown-black copper oxide which, unlike therustthat forms on iron in moist air, protects the underlying metal from further corrosion (passivation). A green layer ofverdigris(copper carbonate) can often be seen on old copper structures, such as the roofing of many older buildings[21]and theStatue of Liberty.[22]Coppertarnisheswhen exposed to somesulfurcompounds, with which it reacts to form variouscopper sulfides.[23]

## Isotopes
There are 29isotopesof copper.63Cuand65Cuare stable, with63Cucomprising approximately 69% of naturally occurring copper; both have aspinof3⁄2.[24]The other isotopes areradioactive, with the most stable being67Cuwith ahalf-lifeof 61.83 hours.[24]Tenmetastable isomershave been characterized;68mCuis the longest-lived with a half-life of 3.8 minutes. Isotopes with amass numberabove 64 decay byβ−, whereas those with a mass number below 64 decay byβ+.64Cu, which has a half-life of 12.7 hours, decays both ways.[25][26]
62Cuand64Cuhave significant applications.62Cuis used in62Cu-PTSM as aradioactive tracerforpositron emission tomography.[27]

## Occurrence
Copper is produced in massive stars[28]and is present in the Earth's crust in a proportion of about 50parts per million(ppm).[29]In nature, copper occurs in a variety of minerals, includingnative copper, copper sulfides such aschalcopyrite,bornite,digenite,covellite, andchalcocite, coppersulfosaltssuch astetrahedite-tennantite, andenargite, copper carbonates such asazuriteandmalachite, and as copper(I) or copper(II) oxides such ascupriteandtenorite, respectively.[17]The largest mass of elemental copper yet discovered weighed 420 tonnes and was found in 1857 on theKeweenaw Peninsulain Michigan, US.[29]Native copper is apolycrystal, with the largest single crystal ever described measuring4.4 × 3.2 × 3.2 cm.[30]Copper is the 26th most abundant element inEarth's crust, representing 50 ppm compared with 75 ppm forzinc, and 14 ppm forlead.[31]
Typical background concentrations of copper do not exceed1 ng/m3in the atmosphere;150 mg/kgin soil;30 mg/kgin vegetation; 2 μg/L in freshwater and0.5 μg/Lin seawater.[32]

## Production
Most copper is mined orextractedas copper sulfides from largeopen pit minesinporphyry copperdeposits that contain 0.4 to 1.0% copper. Sites includeChuquicamata, in Chile,Bingham Canyon Mine, in Utah, United States, andEl Chino Mine, in New Mexico, United States. According to theBritish Geological Survey, in 2005, Chile was the top producer of copper with at least one-third of the world share followed by the United States, Indonesia and Peru.[17]Chile, the world's largest copper producer, supplies the US with 70% of refined copper and alloy imports through 2024. Together with Canada (17%) and Peru (7%), they account for 94% of U.S. copper imports.[33][34]Copper can also be recovered through thein-situ leachprocess. Several sites in the state of Arizona are considered prime candidates for this method.[35]The amount of copper in use is increasing and the quantity available is barely sufficient to allow all countries to reach developed world levels of usage.[36]An alternative source of copper forcollectioncurrently being researched arepolymetallic nodules, which are located at the depths of thePacific Oceanapproximately 3000–6500 meters below sea level. These nodules contain other valuable metals such ascobaltandnickel.[37]

## Reserves and prices
Copper has been in use for at least 10,000 years, but more than 95% of all copper ever mined andsmeltedhas been extracted since 1900.[38]As with many natural resources, the total amount of copper on Earth is vast, with around 1014tons in the top kilometer of Earth's crust, which is about 5 million years' worth at the current rate of extraction. However, only a tiny fraction of these reserves is economically viable with present-day prices and technologies. Estimates of copper reserves available for mining vary from 25 to 60 years, depending on core assumptions such as the growth rate.[39]Recycling is a major source of copper in the modern world.[38]
The price of copper isvolatile.[40]After a peak in 2022 the price unexpectedly fell.[41]And by May 2024, the price on theLondon Metal Exchangehas reached an all-time high above $11,000 per ton.[42]
The global market for copper is one of the mostcommodifiedandfinancializedof thecommodity markets, and has been so for decades.[43]: 213The top exporters of raw copper were Zambia ($6.95B) and Chile ($2.16B),  followed by Democratic Republic of the Congo ($1.41B). Raw copper's top importers were China ($6.13B), Switzerland ($3.15B), and India ($2.05B).[44]

## Copper demand
In 2024, global copper production was estimated at roughly 22.8–22.9 million metric tons.[45][46]Copper demand is increasing due to the ongoingenergy transition to electricity.[47]China accounts for over half the demand.[48]

## Extraction
The great majority of copper ores aresulfides. Common ores are the sulfideschalcopyrite(CuFeS2),bornite(Cu5FeS4) and, to a lesser extent,covellite(CuS) andchalcocite(Cu2S).[49]These ores occur at the level of <1% Cu. Concentration of the ore is required, which begins withcomminutionfollowed byfroth flotation. The remaining concentrate is smelted, which can be described with two simplified equations:[50]
This give crude copper, about 98% Cu by weight, which is purified by electrolysis giving Cu at up to 99.99% purity. During the electrolysis small amounts ofsilverand gold may be precipitated into a sludge that can be reprocessed to recover the precious metals.[51]: 798
Aside from sulfides, another family of ores are oxides.  Approximately 15% of the world's copper supply derives from these oxides.  The beneficiation process for oxides involves extraction with sulfuric acid solutions followed by electrolysis.  In parallel with the above method for "concentrated" sulfide and oxide ores, copper is recovered frommine tailingsand heaps.  A variety of methods are used including leaching with sulfuric acid, ammonia, ferric chloride.  Biological methods are also used.[50][52]
A potential source of copper is polymetallic nodules, which have an estimated concentration 1.3%.[53][54]

## Recycling
According to theInternational Resource Panel'sMetal Stocks in Society report, the global per capita stock of copper in use in society is 35–55 kg. Much of this is in more-developed countries (140–300 kg per capita) rather than less-developed countries (30–40 kg per capita). In 2001, a typical automobile contained 20–30 kg of copper.[50]By 2014, the copper and copper alloy content ofinternal combustion enginevehicles decreased to 16.8 kg, but increased again to 24.5 kg by 2023.[55]At the same time, a batteryelectric vehiclealready contains around 91 kg of copper and copper alloys.[56]
Likealuminium, copper is recyclable without any loss of quality, both from raw state and from manufactured products.[57]An estimated 80% of all copper ever mined is still in use today.[58]In volume, copper is the third most recycled metal after iron and aluminium.[59]As of 2023[update], recycled copper supplies about one-third of global demand.[60]
The process of recycling copper is roughly the same as is used to extract copper but requires fewer steps. High-purity scrap copper is melted in afurnaceand thenreducedand cast intobilletsandingots.[61]Lower-purity scrap is melted to formblack copper(70–90% pure, containing impurities such as iron, zinc, tin, and nickel), followed by oxidation of impurities in aconverterto form blister copper (96–98% pure), which is thenrefinedas before.[62]: 202

## Environmental impacts
Copper mining is energy intensive.[63][64]The extraction generates a substantial waste stream, including potentially toxic dust and heavy metal contamination near sites where it is refined.[65]Since most copper ores are sulfides, smelting is required.  Smelting generatessulfur dioxide, a precursor to atmosphericsulfuric acid, unless it is captured.[50]About 15% of copper comes from low grade (dilute) ore bodies.  Processing is achieved byhydrometallurgy, requiring acidic extractants, which remains in the waste streams after electrolytic deposition of the copper.[50]

## Alloys
Numerous copperalloyshave been formulated, many with important uses.Brassis an alloy of copper andzinc.Bronzeusually refers to copper–tinalloys, but can refer to any alloy of copper such asaluminium bronze. Copper-tin bronzes with various additional metals have been used to createbellsfor centuries; the composition of the alloy directly affects the tone and mechanical characteristics of the instrument.[68]Copper is one of the most important constituents of silver andkaratgold solders used in the jewelry industry, modifying the color, hardness and melting point of the resulting alloys.[69]Some lead-freesoldersconsist of tin alloyed with a small proportion of copper and other metals.[70]
The alloy of copper andnickel, calledcupronickel, is used in low-denomination coins, often for the outer cladding. The US five-cent coin (currently called anickel) consists of 75% copper and 25% nickel in homogeneous composition. Prior to the introduction of cupronickel, which was widely adopted by countries in the latter half of the 20th century,[71]alloys of copper andsilverwere also used, with the United States using an alloy of 90% silver and 10% copper until 1965, when circulating silver was removed from all coins with the exception of the half dollar—these were debased to an alloy of 40% silver and 60% copper between 1965 and 1970.[72]The alloy of 90% copper and 10% nickel, remarkable for its resistance to corrosion, is used for various objects exposed to seawater, though it is vulnerable to the sulfides sometimes found in polluted harbors and estuaries.[73]Alloys of copper with aluminium (about 7%) have a golden color and are used in decorations.[29]Shakudōis a Japanese decorative alloy of copper containing a low percentage of gold, typically 4–10%, that can bepatinatedto a dark blue or black color.[74]

## Compounds
Copper forms a rich variety of compounds, usually withoxidation states+1 and +2, which are often calledcuprousandcupric, respectively.[75]Copper compounds promote or catalyse numerous chemical and biological processes.[76]

## Binary compounds
As with other elements, the simplest compounds of copper are binary compounds, i.e. those containing only two elements, the principal examples being oxides, sulfides, andhalides. Bothcuprousandcupric oxidesare known. Numerouscopper sulfidesare known,[77]being mainly of interest as ores. The stoichiometrically simplest examplescopper(I) sulfide(Cu2S) andcopper monosulfide(CuS).[78]
Cuprouschloride,bromide, andiodideare known, butcopper(I) fluorideremains elusive. Cupricfluoride,chloride, andbromideare also well characterized. Attempts to prepare copper(II) iodide yield only copper(I) iodide and iodine.[75]

## Coordination chemistry
Copper formscoordination complexeswithligands. In aqueous solution, copper(II) exists as[Cu(H2O)6]2+. This complex exhibits the fastest water exchange rate (speed of water ligands attaching and detaching) for any transitionmetal aquo complex. Adding aqueoussodium hydroxidecauses the precipitation of light blue solidcopper(II) hydroxide.[79]A simplified equation is:
Aqueous ammoniaresults in the same precipitate. Upon adding excess ammonia, the precipitate dissolves, formingtetraamminecopper(II):
Many otheroxyanionsform complexes; these includecopper(II) acetate,copper(II) nitrate, andcopper(II) carbonate.Copper(II) sulfateforms a blue crystalline pentahydrate, the most familiar copper compound in the laboratory. It is used in afungicidecalled theBordeaux mixture.[80]
Polyols, compounds containing more than one alcoholfunctional group, generally interact with cupric salts. For example, copper salts are used to test forreducing sugars. Specifically, usingBenedict's reagentandFehling's solutionthe presence of the sugar is signaled by a color change from blue Cu(II) to reddish copper(I) oxide.[81]Schweizer's reagent and related complexes withethylenediamineand otheraminesdissolvecellulose.[82]Amino acidsform very stablechelate complexeswith copper(II).[83]

## Organocopper chemistry
Compounds that contain a carbon-copper bond are known as organocopper compounds. They are very reactive towards oxygen to form copper(I) oxide and havemany uses in chemistry. They are synthesized by treating copper(I) compounds withGrignard reagents,terminal alkynesororganolithium reagents;[84]in particular, the last reaction described produces aGilman reagent. These can undergosubstitutionwithalkyl halidesto formcoupling products; as such, they are important in the field oforganic synthesis.Copper(I) acetylideis highly shock-sensitive but is an intermediate in reactions such as theCadiot–Chodkiewicz coupling[85]and theSonogashira coupling.[86]Conjugate additiontoenones[87]andcarbocuprationof alkynes[88]can also be achieved with organocopper compounds. Copper(I) forms a variety of weak complexes withalkenesandcarbon monoxide, especially in the presence of amine ligands.[89]

## Copper(III) and copper(IV)
Copper(III) is most often found in oxides. A simple example is potassiumcuprate, KCuO2, a blue-black solid.[90]The most extensively studied copper(III) compounds are thecuprate superconductors.Yttrium barium copper oxide(YBa2Cu3O7) consists of both Cu(II) and Cu(III) centres. Like oxide,fluorideis a highlybasicanion[91]and is known to stabilize metal ions in high oxidation states. Both copper(III) and even copper(IV) fluorides are known,K3CuF6andCs2CuF6, respectively.[75]
Some copper proteins formoxo complexes, which, in extensively studied synthetic analog systems, feature copper(III).[92][93]Withtetrapeptides, purple-colored copper(III) complexes are stabilized by the deprotonatedamideligands.[94]
Complexes of copper(III) are also found as intermediates in reactions of organocopper compounds, for example in theKharasch–Sosnovsky reaction.[95][96][97]

## Biochemistry
The biological role for copper commenced with the appearance of oxygen in Earth's atmosphere.[98]Copper proteinshave diverse roles in biological electron transport and oxygen transportation, processes that exploit the easy interconversion of Cu(I) and Cu(II).[99]Copper is essential in the aerobicrespirationof alleukaryotes. Inmitochondria, it is found incytochrome c oxidase, which is the last protein inoxidative phosphorylationwhich stores energy inATP. The copper atoms are alternatively reduced and oxidized during the electron transfer to oxygen.[100]: 383Copper is also found in manysuperoxide dismutases, proteins that catalyze the decomposition ofsuperoxidesby converting it (bydisproportionation) to oxygen andhydrogen peroxide:
The proteinhemocyaninis the oxygen carrier in mostmollusksand somearthropodssuch as thehorseshoe crab(Limulus polyphemus).[101]Because hemocyanin is blue, these organisms have blue blood rather than the red blood of iron-basedhemoglobin. Structurally related to hemocyanin are thelaccasesandtyrosinases. Instead of reversibly binding oxygen, these proteins hydroxylate substrates, illustrated by their role in the formation oflacquers.[102]
Several copper proteins, such as the "blue copper proteins", do not interact directly with substrates; hence they are not enzymes. These proteins relay electrons by the process calledelectron transfer.[102]A unique tetranuclear copper center has been found innitrous-oxide reductase.[103]
Copper levels are closely regulated in bothprokaryoticandeukaryoticcells to balance critical physiological need but avoid toxicity.

## Nutrition
Copper is an essentialtrace elementin plants and animals, but not all microorganisms. The human body contains copper at a level of about 1.4 to 2.1 mg per kg of body mass.[104]

## Absorption and regulation
Copper is absorbed in the gut, then transported to the liver bound toalbumin.[105]After processing in the liver, copper is distributed to other tissues in a second phase, which involves the proteinceruloplasmin, carrying the majority of copper in blood. Ceruloplasmin also carries the copper that is excreted in milk, and is particularly well-absorbed as a copper source.[106]Copper in the body normally undergoesenterohepatic circulation(about 5 mg a day, vs. about 1 mg per day absorbed in the diet and excreted from the body), and the body is able to excrete some excess copper, if needed, viabile, which carries some copper out of the liver that is not then reabsorbed by the intestine.[107][108]
Copper levels and transport are tightly regulated processes.  At least two copper-specificchaperoneshave been isolated.[109]

## Dietary recommendations
TheU.S. Institute of Medicineupdated the estimated average requirements (EARs) and recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) for copper in 2001. If there is not sufficient information to establish EARs and RDAs, an estimate designatedAdequate Intake(AI) is used instead. The AIs for copper are: 200 μg of copper for 0–6-month-old males and females, and 220 μg of copper for 7–12-month-old males and females. For both sexes, the RDAs for copper are: 340 μg of copper for 1–3 years old, 440 μg of copper for 4–8 years old, 700 μg of copper for 9–13 years old, 890 μg of copper for 14–18 years old and 900 μg of copper for ages 19 years and older. For pregnancy, 1,000 μg. For lactation, 1,300 μg.[110]As for safety, the Institute of Medicine also setstolerable upper intake levels(ULs) for vitamins and minerals when evidence is sufficient. In the case of copper, the UL is set at 10 mg/day. Collectively the EARs, RDAs, AIs and ULs are referred to asDietary Reference Intakes.[111]
TheEuropean Food Safety Authority(EFSA) refers to the collective set of information as Dietary Reference Values, with Population Reference Intake (PRI) instead of RDA, and Average Requirement instead of EAR. AI and UL are defined the same as in the United States. For women and men ages 18 and older, the AIs are set at 1.3 and 1.6 mg/day, respectively. AIs for pregnancy and lactation is 1.5 mg/day. For children ages 1–17 years, the AIs increase with age from 0.7 to 1.3 mg/day. These AIs are higher than the U.S. RDAs.[112]The European Food Safety Authority reviewed the same safety question and set its UL at 5 mg/day, which is half the U.S. value.[113]
For U.S. food and dietary supplement labeling purposes, the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of Daily Value (%DV). In 2019, 100% of the Daily Value was revised to 0.9 mg to bring it into agreement with the RDA.[114][115]

## Deficiency
Because of its role in facilitating iron uptake,copper deficiencycan produceanemia-like symptoms,neutropenia, bone abnormalities, hypopigmentation, impaired growth, increased incidence of infections, osteoporosis, hyperthyroidism, and abnormalities in glucose and cholesterol metabolism.[116]Conversely,Wilson's diseaseis genetic disease that causes an accumulation of copper in body tissues.[117]
A minimum dietary value for healthy growth inEuropean rabbitshas been reported to be at least 3ppmin the diet.[118]However, higher concentrations of copper (100 ppm, 200 ppm, or 500 ppm) in the diet of rabbits may favorably influencefeed conversion efficiency, growth rates, and carcass dressing percentages.[119]
Severe deficiency can be found by testing for low plasma or serum copper levels, low ceruloplasmin, and low red blood cell superoxide dismutase levels; these are not sensitive to marginal copper status. The "cytochrome c oxidase activity of leucocytes and platelets" has been stated as another factor in deficiency, but the results have not been confirmed by replication.[120]

## Toxicity
Chronic copper toxicity does not normally occur in humans because of transport systems that regulate absorption and excretion. No retention of copper is expected to occur at the 5 mg/day level.[121]
Research has shown a link between copper level regulation in the body and several neurological diseases, especiallyAlzheimer's disease. The studies suggest the issue is an age-related breakdown of internal regulation mechanism rather than an exposure toxicity.[122]
Gram quantities of various copper salts have been taken in suicide attempts and produced acute copper toxicity in humans, resulting in irreversible liver failure.[123]Autosomal recessive mutations in copper transport proteins also cause regulation failure, leading toWilson's diseasewith copper accumulation,cirrhosisof the liver, and psychiatric symptoms.[123]

## Bioleaching
Bacteria have been used to extract copper in industrial scalebioleachingsystems. Microbe solutions percolate through crushed ore converting insoluble copper sulfides to soluble copper sulfates;electrowinningextracts high purity copper from the resulting solution.[124]: 628

## Human exposure
In the US, theOccupational Safety and Health Administration(OSHA) has designated apermissible exposure limit(PEL) for copper dust in the workplace as a time-weighted average (TWA) of 1 mg/m3and 0.1mg/m3for copper fumes[125]TheNational Institute for Occupational Safety and Health(NIOSH) has set arecommended exposure limit(REL) of 1 mg/m3, time-weighted average. TheIDLH(immediately dangerous to life and health) value is 100 mg/m3.[126]Copper is a constituent oftobacco smoke.[127][128]

## Copper Age
Copper occurs naturally asnative metallic copperand was known to some of the oldest civilizations on record. The history of native copper use dates to 9000 BC in the Middle East;[129]a native copper pendant was found in northern Iraq that dates to 8700 BC.[130]Evidence suggests that gold andmeteoric iron(but not smelted iron) were the only metals used by humans before copper.[131]The history of copper metallurgy is thought to follow this sequence: first,cold workingof native copper, thenannealing,smelting, and, finally, casting. The earliest archaeological support ofsmelting(hot metallurgy) in Eurasia is found in theBalkansandCarpathian Mountains, as evidenced by findings of copper objects made by metal casting and smelting dated to around6,200 ~  5,000 BCE,with the invention of coppermetallurgy.[132][133][134][135]
Production of cold worked non-smelted copper in theOld Copper Complexin Michigan and Wisconsin is dated between 6500 and 3000 BC.[136][137][138]A copper spearpoint found in Wisconsin has been dated to 6500 BC.[136]Copper usage by the indigenous peoples of the Old Copper Complex from theGreat Lakes regionof North America has been radiometrically dated to as far back as 7500 BC.[136][139][140]Indigenous peoples of North America around theGreat Lakesmay have also been mining copper during this time, making it one of the oldest known examples ofcopper extractionin the world.[141]There is evidence from prehistoric lead pollution from lakes in Michigan that people in the region began mining copperc.6000 BC.[141][136]Evidence suggests that utilitarian copper objects fell increasingly out of use in the Old Copper Complex of North America during the Bronze Age and a shift towards an increased production of ornamental copper objects occurred.[142]
The earliest evidence oflost-wax castingcopper comes from an amulet found inMehrgarh, Pakistan, and is dated to 4000 BC.[143]Investment castingwas invented in 4500–4000 BC in Southeast Asia[129]Smelting was probably discovered in China before 2800 BC, in Central America around 600 AD, and in West Africa about the 9th or 10th century AD.[144]Carbon datinghas established mining atAlderley EdgeinCheshire, UK, at 2280 to 1890 BC.[145]
Ötzi the Iceman, a male dated from 3300 to 3200 BC, was found with an axe with a copper head 99.7% pure; high levels ofarsenicin his hair suggest an involvement in copper smelting.[146]Experience with copper has assisted the development of other metals; in particular, copper smelting likely led to the discovery ofiron smelting.[146]

## Bronze Age
Natural bronze, a type of copper made from ores rich in silicon, arsenic, and (rarely) tin, came into general use in the Balkans around 5500 BC.[147]Alloying copper with tin to make bronze was first practiced about 4000 years after the discovery of copper smelting, and about 2000 years after "natural bronze" had come into general use.[148]Bronze artifacts from theVinča culturedate to 4500 BC.[149]SumerianandEgyptianartifacts of copper and bronze alloys date to 3000 BC.[150]Egyptian blue, or cuprorivaite (calcium copper silicate), is a synthetic pigment that contains copper and started being used inancient Egyptaround 3250 BC.[151]The manufacturing process of Egyptian blue was known to the Romans, but by the fourth century AD the pigment fell out of use and the secret to its manufacturing process became lost. The RomanVitruviussaid in the first century BC that the blue pigment was made from copper minerals or bronze, lime, and afluxlikenatron, and this basic recipe has been confirmed in modern times.[152]
TheBronze Agebegan in Southeastern Europe around 3700–3300 BC, in Northwestern Europe about 2500 BC. It ended with the beginning of the Iron Age, 2000–1000 BC in the Near East, and 600 BC in Northern Europe. The transition between theNeolithicperiod and the Bronze Age was formerly termed theChalcolithicperiod (copper-stone), when copper tools were used with stone tools. The term has gradually fallen out of favor because in some parts of the world, the Chalcolithic and Neolithic are coterminous at both ends. Brass, an alloy of copper and zinc, is of much more recent origin. It was known to the Greeks, but became a significant supplement to bronze during the Roman Empire.[150]

## Ancient and post-classical
In Greece, copper was known by the namechalkos(χαλκός). It was an important resource for the Romans, Greeks and other ancient peoples. In Roman times, it was known asaes Cyprium,aesbeing the generic Latin term for copper alloys andCypriumfromCyprus, where much copper was mined. The phrase was simplified tocuprum, hence the Englishcopper.Aphrodite(Venusin Rome) represented copper in mythology and alchemy because of its lustrous beauty and its ancient use in producing mirrors; Cyprus, the source of copper, was sacred to the goddess. The seven heavenly bodies known to the ancients were associated with the seven metals known in antiquity, and Venus was assigned to copper, both because of the connection to the goddess and because Venus was the brightest heavenly body after the Sun and Moon and so corresponded to the most lustrous and desirable metal after gold and silver.[153]
Copper was the most extensively used metal among natives of North America, with evidence for use going back 7000 years.[154]Native copper is known to have been extracted from sites onIsle Royalewith primitive stone tools between 800 and 1600 AD.[155]Copper, probably from pure nuggets found in theGreat Lakesarea, was worked by repeated hammering and annealing in the North American city ofCahokia(near modern-day Missouri) around 1000–1300 AD.[156]There are several exquisite copper plates, known as theMississippian copper plates, that have been found in North America in the area around Cahokia, dating from this time period (1000–1300 AD).[156]
In South America, a copper mask dated to 1000 BC found in the Argentinian Andes is the oldest known copper artifact discovered in the Andes.[157]Peru has been considered the origin for early coppermetallurgy in pre-Columbian America, but the copper mask from Argentina suggests that theCajón del Maipoof the southern Andes was another important center for early copper workings in South America.[157]Copper metallurgy in Peru dates to around 500 BC, with larger scale production beginning around 900 AD as part of the rise of theSican culturein northern Peru. The production continued through a series of conquests by theChimorandIncacultures, ending with the Spanish conquest in 1532.[158]
In Sub-Saharan Africa, throughout the period from the first mines around 2000 BC inAgadesuntil the early 1800s, copper was viewed as more precious and prestigious than either gold or silver. Copper was widely traded in Africa and fulfilled a number of religious, political, and social functions. By contrast, local deposit of gold were ignored until contact with Portuguese and Arab traders.[159][160][161]
The cultural role of copper has been important, particularly in currency. Romans in the 6th through 3rd centuries BC used copper lumps as money. At first, the copper itself was valued, but gradually the shape and look of the copper became more important.Julius Caesarhad his own coins made from brass, whileOctavianus Augustus Caesar's coins were made from Cu-Pb-Sn alloys. With an estimated annual output of around 15,000 t,Roman copper mining and smelting activitiesreached a scale unsurpassed until the time of theIndustrial Revolution; theprovincesmost intensely mined were those ofHispania, Cyprus and in Central Europe.[162][163]
The gates of theTemple of JerusalemusedCorinthian bronze, a copper, silver, and gold alloy treated withdepletion gilding, which successively removes oxidized copper to create a gold surface coat. The process was most prevalent inAlexandria, where alchemy, inspired by the chemical treatment resulting in gold appearance, is thought to have begun.[164]

## Modern
TheGreat Copper Mountainwas a mine inFalun, Sweden, that operated from the 10th century to 1992. It satisfied two-thirds of Europe's copper consumption in the 17th century and helped fund many of Sweden's wars during that time.[165]It was referred to as the nation's treasury; Sweden had acopper backed currency.[166]
Copper is used in roofing,[21]currency, and for photographic technology known as thedaguerreotype. Copper was used inRenaissancesculpture, and was used to construct theStatue of Liberty; copper continues to be used in construction of various types.Copper platingandcopper sheathingwere widely used to protect the under-water hulls of ships, a technique pioneered by the British Admiralty in the 18th century.[167]TheNorddeutsche Affineriein Hamburg was the first modernelectroplatingplant, starting its production in 1876.[168]
During the rise in demand for copper for the Age of Electricity, from the 1880s until the Great Depression of the 1930s, the United States produced one third to half the world's newly mined copper.[169]Major districts included the Keweenaw district of northern Michigan, primarily native copper deposits, which was eclipsed by the vast sulphide deposits ofButte, Montana, in the late 1880s, which itself was eclipsed by porphyry deposits of the Southwest United States, especially atBingham Canyon, Utah, andMorenci, Arizona. Introduction of open pit steam shovel mining and innovations in smelting, refining, flotation concentration and other processing steps led to mass production. Early in the twentieth century,Arizonaranked first, followed byMontana, thenUtahandMichigan.[170]
Flash smeltingwas developed byOutokumpuin Finland and first applied atHarjavaltain 1949; the energy-efficient process accounts for 50% of the world's primary copper production.[171]
TheIntergovernmental Council of Copper Exporting Countries, formed in 1967 by Chile, Peru, Zaire, and Zambia, operated in the copper market asOPECdoes in oil, though it never achieved the same influence, particularly because the second-largest producer, the United States, was never a member; it was dissolved in 1988.[172]In 2008, China became the world's largest importer of copper.[43]: 187

## Applications
The major applications of copper are electrical wire (60%), roofing and plumbing (20%), and industrial machinery (15%). Copper is used mostly as a pure metal, but when greater hardness is required, it is put into such alloys asbrassandbronze(5% of total use).[29]For more than two centuries, copper paint has been used on boat hulls to control the growth of plants and shellfish.[173]A small part of the copper supply is used for nutritional supplements and fungicides in agriculture.[80][174]Pure copper's ductility, weakness and high friction between copper chips and cutting tools makesmachiningof copper difficult; alloys are preferred for goodmachinability.[175]Coppercookwarecan react with acidic or alkaline foods, leaving a metallic taste, but is useful for whipping egg-whites.[176]

## Wire and cable
Despite competition from other materials, copper remains the preferredelectrical conductorin nearly all categories of electrical wiring except overheadelectric power transmissionwherealuminiumis often preferred.[177][178]Copper wire is used inpower generation,power transmission,electric power distribution,telecommunications,electronicscircuitry, and countless types ofelectrical equipment.[179]Electrical wiringis the most important market for the copper industry.[180]This includes structural power wiring, power distribution cable, appliance wire, communications cable, automotive wire and cable, and magnet wire. Roughly half of all copper mined is used for electrical wire and cable conductors.[181]Many electrical devices rely on copper wiring because of its multitude of beneficial properties, such as its highelectrical conductivity,tensile strength,ductility,creep (deformation)resistance,corrosionresistance, lowthermal expansion, highthermal conductivity, ease ofsoldering, and ease of installation.[182]: 5.3
For a short period from the late 1960s to the late 1970s, copper wiring was replaced byaluminium wiringin many housing construction projects in America but improper design resulted in fire hazards.[183][184]The safety issues have since been solved by use of larger sizes of aluminium wire (#8AWG and up), and properly designed aluminium wiring is still being installed in place of copper. For example, theAirbus A380uses aluminum wire in place of copper wire for electrical power transmission.[185]

## Electronics and related devices
Integrated circuitsandprinted circuit boardsincreasingly feature copper in place of aluminium because of its superior electrical conductivity;heat sinksandheat exchangersuse copper because of its superior heat dissipation properties.Electromagnets,vacuum tubes,cathode-ray tubes, andmagnetronsin microwave ovens use copper, as dowaveguidesfor microwave radiation.[186]

## Electric motors
Copper's superiorconductivityenhances the efficiency of electricalmotors.[187]This is important because motors and motor-driven systems account for 43–46% of all global electricity consumption and 69% of all electricity used by industry.[188]Increasing the mass and cross section of copper in acoilincreases the efficiency of the motor.Copper motor rotors, a new technology designed for motor applications where energy savings are prime design objectives,[189][190]are enabling general-purposeinduction motorsto meet and exceedNational Electrical Manufacturers Association(NEMA)premium efficiencystandards.[191]

## Architecture
Copper has been used since ancient times as a durable,corrosion resistant, and weatherproof architectural material.Roofs,flashings,rain gutters,downspouts,domes,spires, vaults, anddoorshave been made from copper for hundreds or thousands of years. Copper's architectural use has been expanded in modern times to include interior and exteriorwall cladding, buildingexpansion joints,radio frequency shielding, andantimicrobialand decorative indoor products such as attractive handrails, bathroom fixtures, and counter tops. Some of copper's other important benefits as an architectural material include lowthermal movement, light weight,lightning protection, and recyclability.[192][193][194][195]
The metal's distinctive natural greenpatinahas long been coveted by architects and designers. The final patina is a particularly durable layer that is highly resistant to atmospheric corrosion, thereby protecting the underlying metal against further weathering.[196][197][198]It can be a mixture of carbonate and sulfate compounds in various amounts, depending upon environmental conditions such as sulfur-containing acid rain.[199][200][201][202]Architectural copper and its alloys can also be'finished'to take on a particular look, feel, or color. Finishes include mechanical surface treatments, chemical coloring, and coatings.[203]
Copper has excellentbrazingandsolderingproperties and can bewelded; the best results are obtained withgas metal arc welding.[204]

## Antibiofouling
Copper isbiostatic, meaning bacteria and many other forms of life will not grow on it. For this reason it has long been used to line parts of ships to protect againstbarnaclesandmussels. It was originally used pure, but has since been superseded byMuntz metaland copper-based paint. Similarly, as discussed incopper alloys in aquaculture, copper alloys have become important netting materials in theaquacultureindustry because they areantimicrobialand preventbiofouling, even in extreme conditions,[205]and have strong structural andcorrosion-resistantproperties in marine environments.[206]

## Antimicrobial
Copper-alloy touch surfaceshave natural properties that destroy a wide range ofmicroorganisms(e.g.,E. coliO157:H7,methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus(MRSA),Staphylococcus,Clostridium difficile,influenza A virus,adenovirus,SARS-CoV-2, andfungi).[207][208]Some copper alloys were proven to kill more than 99.9% of disease-causing bacteria within just two hours when cleaned regularly.[209]TheUnited States Environmental Protection Agency(EPA) has approved the registrations of these copper alloys as "antimicrobialmaterials with public health benefits";[209]that approval allows manufacturers to make legal claims to the public health benefits of products made of registered alloys. In addition, the EPA has approved a long list of antimicrobial copper products made from these alloys, such as bedrails,handrails, over-bed tables,sinks,faucets,door knobs,toilethardware,computer keyboards,health clubequipment, andshopping carthandles. Copper doorknobs are used by hospitals to minimize the transfer of disease, andLegionnaires' diseaseis suppressed by copper tubing in plumbing systems.[210]Antimicrobial copper alloy products are now being installed in healthcare facilities in the UK, Ireland, Japan, Korea, France, Denmark, and Brazil, and in the subway transit system in Santiago, Chile, where copper–zinc alloy handrails were installed in some 30 stations between 2011 and 2014.[211][212][213]Copper surfaces in healthcare have been advocated for in the US, as well.[214]Textile fibers can be blended with copper to create antimicrobial protective fabrics.[215]

## Fungicide
Copper is widely used as a wood preservative primarily because it is an effectivefungicideagainstsoft rot fungiwhile avoiding the significant environmental impact ofchromium and arsenic based preservatives.[216]

## Folk medicine
Copper is commonly used in jewelry, and according to some folklore, copper bracelets relievearthritissymptoms.[217]In one trial for osteoarthritis and one trial for rheumatoid arthritis, no differences were found between copper bracelet and control (non-copper) bracelet.[218][219]No evidence shows that copper can be absorbed through the skin.[220]

## References
[1]
[2]