## Cubism
Cubismis an early-20th-centuryavant-gardeart movementwhich began inParis. It revolutionizedpaintingand the visual arts, and sparked artistic innovations inmusic,ballet,literature, andarchitecture.
Cubist subjects are analyzed, broken up, and reassembled in an abstract form. Instead of depicting objects from a single perspective, the artist depicts the subject from multiple perspectives to represent the subject in a greater context.[1]Cubism has been considered the most influential art movement of the 20th century.[2][3]The termcubismis broadly associated with a variety of artworks produced in Paris (MontmartreandMontparnasse) or near Paris (Puteaux) during the 1910s and throughout the 1920s.
The movement was pioneered in partnership byPablo PicassoandGeorges Braque, and joined byJean Metzinger,Albert Gleizes,Robert Delaunay,Henri Le Fauconnier,Juan Gris, andFernand Léger.[4]One primary influence that led to Cubism was the representation ofthree-dimensionalform in the late works ofPaul Cézanne.[2]A retrospective of Cézanne's paintings was held at theSalon d'Automneof 1904, current works were displayed at the 1905 and 1906Salon d'Automne, followed by two commemorative retrospectives after his death in 1907.[5]
In France, offshoots of Cubism developed, includingOrphism,abstract artand laterPurism.[6][7]The impact of Cubism was far-reaching and wide-ranging in the arts and in popular culture. Cubism introducedcollageas a modern art form. In France and other countriesFuturism,Suprematism,Dada,Constructivism,De StijlandArt Decodeveloped in response to Cubism.[4]Early Futurist paintings hold in common with Cubism the fusing of the past and the present, the representation of different views of the subject pictured at the same time or successively, also called multiple perspective, simultaneity or multiplicity,[8]while Constructivism was influenced by Picasso's technique of constructing sculpture from separate elements.[9]Other common threads between these disparate movements include the faceting or simplification of geometric forms, and the association of mechanization and modern life.

## History
Scholars have divided the history of Cubism into phases. In one scheme, the first phase of Cubism, known asAnalytic Cubism, a phrase coined byJuan Grisa posteriori,[10]was both radical and influential as a short but highly significant art movement between 1910 and 1912 in France. A second phase,Synthetic Cubism, is generally considered to run from about 1912 to 1914, characterised by simpler shapes and brighter colours, and experiments in texture and pattern, for example, using newspaper print and patterned paper.[11]Synthetic Cubismremained vital until around 1919, when theSurrealistmovement gained popularity. Englishart historianDouglas Cooperproposed another scheme, describing three phases of Cubism in his book,The Cubist Epoch. According to Cooper there was "Early Cubism", (from 1906 to 1908) when the movement was initially developed in the studios of Picasso and Braque; the second phase being called "High Cubism", (from 1909 to 1914) during which time Juan Gris emerged as an important exponent (after 1911); and finally Cooper referred to "Late Cubism" (from 1914 to 1921) as the last phase of Cubism as a radicalavant-gardemovement.[12]Douglas Cooper's restrictive use of these terms to distinguish the work of Braque, Picasso, Gris (from 1911) and Léger (to a lesser extent) implied an intentional value judgement.[13]

## Proto-Cubism: 1907–1908
Cubism burgeoned between 1907 and 1911. Pablo Picasso's 1907 paintingLes Demoiselles d'Avignonhas often been considered aproto-Cubistwork.
In 1908, in his review ofGeorges Braque's exhibition atKahnweiler's gallery, the criticLouis Vauxcellescalled Braque a daring man who despises form, "reducing everything, places and a figures and houses, to geometric schemas, to cubes".[15][16]
Vauxcelles recounted how Matisse told him at the time, "Braque has just sent in to the 1908Salon d'Automnea painting made of little cubes".[16]The critic Charles Morice relayed Matisse's words and spoke of Braque's little cubes. The motif of the viaduct at l'Estaque had inspired Braque to produce three paintings marked by the simplification of form and deconstruction of perspective.[17]
Georges Braque's 1908Houses at l'Estaque(and related works) prompted Vauxcelles, inGil Blas, 25 March 1909, to refer tobizarreries cubiques(cubic oddities).[18]Gertrude Steinreferred to landscapes made by Picasso in 1909, such asReservoir at Horta de Ebro, as the first Cubist paintings. The first organized group exhibition by Cubists took place at theSalon des IndépendantsinParisduring the spring of 1911 in a room called 'Salle 41'; it included works byJean Metzinger,Albert Gleizes,Fernand Léger,Robert DelaunayandHenri Le Fauconnier, yet no works by Picasso or Braque were exhibited.[13]
By 1911 Picasso was recognized as the inventor of Cubism, while Braque's importance and precedence was argued later, with respect to his treatment of space, volume and mass in the L'Estaque landscapes. But "this view of Cubism is associated with a distinctly restrictive definition of which artists are properly to be called Cubists," wrote the art historian Christopher Green: "Marginalizing the contribution of the artists who exhibited at the Salon des Indépendants in 1911 [...]"[13]
The assertion that the Cubist depiction of space, mass, time, and volume supports (rather than contradicts) the flatness of the canvas was made byDaniel-Henry Kahnweileras early as 1920,[19]but it was subject to criticism in the 1950s and 1960s, especially byClement Greenberg.[20]
Contemporary views of Cubism are complex, formed to some extent in response to the "Salle 41" Cubists, whose methods were too distinct from those of Picasso and Braque to be considered merely secondary to them. Alternative interpretations of Cubism have therefore developed. Wider views of Cubism include artists who were later associated with the "Salle 41" artists, e.g.,Francis Picabia; the brothersJacques Villon,Raymond Duchamp-VillonandMarcel Duchamp, who beginning in late 1911 formed the core of theSection d'Or(or thePuteaux Group); the sculptorsAlexander Archipenko,Joseph CsakyandOssip Zadkineas well asJacques LipchitzandHenri Laurens; and painters such asLouis Marcoussis,Roger de La Fresnaye,František Kupka,Diego Rivera,Léopold Survage,Auguste Herbin,André Lhote,Gino Severini(after 1916),María Blanchard(after 1916), andGeorges Valmier(after 1918). More fundamentally, Christopher Green argues that Douglas Cooper's terms were "later undermined by interpretations of the work of Picasso, Braque, Gris and Léger that stress iconographic and ideological questions rather than methods of representation."[13]
John Bergersaid, "The metaphorical model of Cubism is the diagram: The diagram being a visible symbolic representation of invisible processes, forces, structures. A diagram need not eschew certain aspects of appearance but these too will be treated as signs not as imitations or recreations."[21]

## Early Cubism: 1909–1914
There was a distinct difference between Kahnweiler's Cubists and the Salon Cubists. Prior to 1914, Picasso, Braque, Gris and Léger (to a lesser extent) gained the support of a single committed art dealer in Paris, Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler, who guaranteed them an annual income for the exclusive right to buy their works. Kahnweiler sold only to a small circle of connoisseurs. His support gave his artists the freedom to experiment in relative privacy. Picasso worked in Montmartre until 1912, while Braque and Gris remained there until after the First World War. Léger was based in Montparnasse.[13]
In contrast, the Salon Cubists built their reputation primarily by exhibiting regularly at theSalon d'Automneand the Salon des Indépendants, both major non-academic Salons in Paris. They were inevitably more aware of public response and the need to communicate.[13]Already in 1910 a group began to form which included Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay and Léger. They met regularly at Henri le Fauconnier's studio near theboulevard du Montparnasse. These soirées often included writers such as Guillaume Apollinaire andAndré Salmon. Together with other young artists, the group wanted to emphasise a research into form, in opposition to the Neo-Impressionist emphasis on color.[22]
Louis Vauxcelles, in his review of the 26th Salon des Indépendants (1910), made a passing and imprecise reference to Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, Léger and Le Fauconnier as "ignorant geometers, reducing the human body, the site, to pallid cubes."[23][24]At the 1910Salon d'Automne, a few months later, Metzinger exhibited his highly fracturedNu à la cheminée (Nude), which was subsequently reproduced in bothDu "Cubisme"(1912) andLes Peintres Cubistes(1913).[25]
The first public controversy generated by Cubism resulted from Salon showings at the Indépendants during the spring of 1911. This showing by Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, le Fauconnier and Léger brought Cubism to the attention of the general public for the first time. Amongst the Cubist works presented, Robert Delaunay exhibited hisEiffel Tower, Tour Eiffel(Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York).[26]
At theSalon d'Automneof the same year, in addition to the Indépendants group ofSalle 41, were exhibited works byAndré Lhote,Marcel Duchamp, Jacques Villon,Roger de La Fresnaye,André Dunoyer de SegonzacandFrantišek Kupka. The exhibition was reviewed in the October 8, 1911 issue ofThe New York Times. This article was published a year afterGelett Burgess'The Wild Men of Paris,[27]and two years prior to theArmory Show, which introduced astonished Americans, accustomed to realistic art, to the experimental styles of the European avant garde, including Fauvism, Cubism, and Futurism. The 1911New York Timesarticle portrayed works by Picasso, Matisse, Derain, Metzinger and others dated before 1909; not exhibited at the 1911 Salon. The article was titledThe "Cubists" Dominate Paris' Fall Salonand subtitledEccentric School of Painting Increases Its Vogue in the Current Art Exhibition – What Its Followers Attempt to Do.[28][29]
Among all the paintings on exhibition at the Paris Fall Salon none is attracting so much attention as the extraordinary productions of the so-called "Cubist" school. In fact, dispatches from Paris suggest these works are easily the main feature of the exhibition. [...]
In spite of the crazy nature of the "Cubist" theories the number of those professing them is fairly respectable. Georges Braque, André Derain, Picasso, Czobel, Othon Friesz, Herbin, Metzinger—these are a few of the names signed to canvases before which Paris has stood and now again stands in blank amazement.
What do they mean? Have those responsible for them taken leave of their senses? Is it art or madness? Who knows?[28][29]

## Salon des Indépendants
The subsequent 1912 Salon des Indépendants located in Paris (20 March to 16 May 1912) was marked by the presentation of Marcel Duchamp'sNude Descending a Staircase, No. 2, which itself caused a scandal, even amongst the Cubists. It was in fact rejected by the hanging committee, which included his brothers and other Cubists. Although the work was shown in the Salon de la Section d'Or in October 1912 and the 1913 Armory Show in New York, Duchamp never forgave his brothers and former colleagues for censoring his work.[22][30]Juan Gris, a new addition to the Salon scene, exhibited hisPortrait of Picasso(Art Institute of Chicago), while Metzinger's two showings includedLa Femme au Cheval(Woman with a horse, 1911–1912,National Gallery of Denmark).[31]Delaunay's monumentalLa Ville de Paris(Musée d'art moderne de la Ville de Paris) and Léger'sLa Noce(The Wedding, Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris), were also exhibited.

## Galeries Dalmau
In 1912,Galeries Dalmaupresented the first declared group exhibition of Cubism worldwide (Exposició d'Art Cubista),[32][33][34]with a controversial showing by Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Juan Gris, Marie Laurencin and Marcel Duchamp (Barcelona, 20 April to 10 May 1912). The Dalmau exhibition comprised 83 works by 26 artists.[35][36][37]Jacques Nayral's association with Gleizes led him to write the Preface for the Cubist exhibition,[32]which was fully translated and reproduced in the newspaperLa Veu de Catalunya.[38][39]Duchamp'sNude Descending a Staircase, No. 2was exhibited for the first time.[40]
Extensive media coverage (in newspapers and magazines) before, during and after the exhibition launched the Galeries Dalmau as a force in the development and propagation of modernism in Europe.[40]While press coverage was extensive, it was not always positive. Articles were published in the newspapersEsquella de La Torratxa[41]andEl Noticiero Universal[42]attacking the Cubists with a series of caricatures laced with derogatory text.[42]Art historian Jaime Brihuega writes of the Dalmau show: "No doubt that the exhibition produced a strong commotion in the public, who welcomed it with a lot of suspicion.[43]
A major development in Cubism occurred in 1912 with Braque's and Picasso's introduction of collage in the modernist sense. Picasso is credited with creating the first Cubist collage,Still life With Chair Caning, in May 1912,[44]while Braque preceded Picasso in the creation of Cubist cardboard sculptures andpapiers collés.[45]Papiers collés were often composed of pieces of everyday paper artifacts such as newspaper, table cloth, wallpaper and sheet music, whereas Cubist collages combined disparate materials—in the case ofStill-life With Chair Caning, freely brushed oil paint and commercially printed oilcloth together on a canvas.[44]

## Salon d'Automne
The Cubist contribution to the1912 Salon d'Automnecreated scandal regarding the use of government owned buildings, such as theGrand Palais, to exhibit such artwork. The indignation of the politicianJean Pierre Philippe Lampuémade the front page ofLe Journal, 5 October 1912.[46]The controversy spread to the Municipal Council of Paris, leading to a debate in the Chambre des Députés about the use of public funds to provide the venue for such art.[47]The Cubists were defended by the Socialist deputy,Marcel Sembat.[47][48][49]
It was against this background of public anger that Jean Metzinger and Albert Gleizes wroteDu "Cubisme"(published by Eugène Figuière in 1912, translated to English and Russian in 1913).[50]Among the works exhibited wereLe Fauconnier's vast compositionLes Montagnards attaqués par des ours (Mountaineers Attacked by Bears)now at Rhode Island School of Design Museum,Joseph Csaky'sDeux Femme, Two Women(a sculpture now lost), in addition to the highly abstract paintings by Kupka,Amorpha(The National Gallery, Prague), andPicabia,La Source (The Spring)(Museum of Modern Art, New York).

## Abstraction and the ready-made
The most extreme forms of Cubism were not those practiced by Picasso and Braque, who resisted total abstraction. Other Cubists, by contrast, especiallyFrantišek Kupka, and those consideredOrphistsbyApollinaire(Delaunay, Léger, Picabia and Duchamp), accepted abstraction by removing visible subject matter entirely. Kupka's two entries at the 1912 Salon d'Automne,Amorpha-Fugue à deux couleursandAmorpha chromatique chaude, were highly abstract (or nonrepresentational) and metaphysical in orientation. Both Duchamp in 1912 and Picabia from 1912 to 1914 developed an expressive and allusive abstraction dedicated to complex emotional and sexual themes. Beginning in 1912 Delaunay painted a series of paintings entitledSimultaneous Windows, followed by a series entitledFormes Circulaires, in which he combined planar structures with bright prismatic hues; based on the optical characteristics of juxtaposed colors his departure from reality in the depiction of imagery was quasi-complete. In 1913–14 Léger produced a series entitledContrasts of Forms, giving a similar stress to color, line and form. His Cubism, despite its abstract qualities, was associated with themes of mechanization and modern life. Apollinaire supported these early developments of abstract Cubism inLes Peintres cubistes(1913),[25]writing of a new "pure" painting in which the subject was vacated. But in spite of his use of the term Orphism these works were so different that they defy attempts to place them in a single category.[13]
Also labeled an Orphist by Apollinaire, Marcel Duchamp was responsible for another extreme development inspired by Cubism. Theready-madearose from a joint consideration that the work itself is considered an object (just as a painting), and that it uses the material detritus of the world (as collage and papier collé in the Cubist construction and Assemblage). The next logical step, for Duchamp, was to present an ordinary object as a self-sufficient work of art representing only itself. In 1913 he attached a bicycle wheel to a kitchen stool and in 1914 selected a bottle-drying rack as a sculpture in its own right.[13]

## Section d'Or
TheSection d'Or, also known asGroupe de Puteaux, founded by some of the most conspicuous Cubists, was a collective of painters, sculptors and critics associated with Cubism and Orphism, active from 1911 through about 1914, coming to prominence in the wake of their controversial showing at the 1911Salon des Indépendants. TheSalon de la Section d'Orat theGalerie La Boétiein Paris, October 1912, was arguably the most important pre-World War I Cubist exhibition; exposing Cubism to a wide audience. Over 200 works were displayed, and the fact that many of the artists showed artworks representative of their development from 1909 to 1912 gave the exhibition the allure of a Cubist retrospective.[51]
The group seems to have adopted the name Section d'Or to distinguish themselves from the narrower definition of Cubism developed in parallel byPablo PicassoandGeorges Braquein theMontmartrequarter of Paris, and to show that Cubism, rather than being an isolated art-form, represented the continuation of a grand tradition (indeed, thegolden ratiohad fascinated Western intellectuals of diverse interests for at least 2,400 years).[52]
The idea of the Section d'Or originated in the course of conversations between Metzinger, Gleizes and Jacques Villon. The group's title was suggested by Villon, after reading a 1910 translation ofLeonardo da Vinci'sTrattato della PitturabyJoséphin Péladan.
During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Europeans were discoveringAfrican, Polynesian,MicronesianandNative Americanart. Artists such asPaul Gauguin,Henri Matisse, and Pablo Picasso were intrigued and inspired by the stark power and simplicity of styles of those foreign cultures. Around 1906, Picasso met Matisse throughGertrude Stein, at a time when both artists had recently acquired an interest inprimitivism,Iberiansculpture,African artandAfrican tribal masks. They became friendly rivals and competed with each other throughout their careers, perhaps leading to Picasso entering a new period in his work by 1907, marked by the influence of Greek, Iberian and African art. Picasso's paintings of 1907 have been characterized asProtocubism, as notably seen inLes Demoiselles d'Avignon, theantecedentof Cubism.[14]
Art historian Douglas Cooper saysPaul GauguinandPaul Cézanne"were particularly influential to the formation of Cubism and especially important to the paintings of Picasso during 1906 and 1907".[53]Cooper goes on to say: "TheDemoisellesis generally referred to as the first Cubist picture. This is an exaggeration, for although it was a major first step towards Cubism it is not yet Cubist. The disruptive,expressionistelement in it is even contrary to the spirit of Cubism, which looked at the world in a detached, realistic spirit. Nevertheless, theDemoisellesis the logical picture to take as the starting point for Cubism, because it marks the birth of a new pictorial idiom, because in it Picasso violently overturned established conventions and because all that followed grew out of it."[14]
The most serious objection to regarding theDemoisellesas the origin of Cubism, with its evident influence of primitive art, is that "such deductions are unhistorical", wrote the art historianDaniel Robbins. This familiar explanation "fails to give adequate consideration to the complexities of a flourishing art that existed just before and during the period when Picasso's new painting developed."[54]Between 1905 and 1908, a conscious search for a new style caused rapid changes in art across France, Germany, The Netherlands, Italy, and Russia. The Impressionists had used a double point of view, and bothLes Nabisand theSymbolists(who also admired Cézanne) flattened the picture plane, reducing their subjects to simple geometric forms.Neo-Impressioniststructure and subject matter, most notably to be seen in the works ofGeorges Seurat(e.g.,Parade de Cirque,Le ChahutandLe Cirque), was another important influence. There were also parallels in the development of literature and social thought.[54]
In addition to Seurat, the roots of cubism are to be found in the two distinct tendencies of Cézanne's later work: first his breaking of the painted surface into small multifaceted areas of paint, thereby emphasizing the plural viewpoint given bybinocular vision, and second his interest in the simplification of natural forms into cylinders, spheres, and cones. However, the cubists explored this concept further than Cézanne. They represented all the surfaces of depicted objects in a single picture plane, as if the objects had all their faces visible at the same time. This new kind of depiction revolutionized the way objects could be visualized in painting and art.
The historical study of Cubism began in the late 1920s, drawing at first from sources of limited data, namely the opinions ofGuillaume Apollinaire. It came to rely heavily onDaniel-Henry Kahnweiler's bookDer Weg zum Kubismus(published in 1920), which centered on the developments of Picasso, Braque, Léger, and Gris. The terms "analytical" and "synthetic" which subsequently emerged have been widely accepted since the mid-1930s. Both terms are historical impositions that occurred after the facts they identify. Neither phase was designated as such at the time corresponding works were created. "If Kahnweiler considers Cubism as Picasso and Braque," wrote Daniel Robbins, "our only fault is in subjecting other Cubists' works to the rigors of that limited definition."[54]
The traditional interpretation of "Cubism", formulatedpost factoas a means of understanding the works of Braque and Picasso, has affected our appreciation of other twentieth-century artists. It is difficult to apply to painters such asJean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes,Robert DelaunayandHenri Le Fauconnier, whose fundamental differences from traditional Cubism compelled Kahnweiler to question whether to call them Cubists at all. According toDaniel Robbins, "To suggest that merely because these artists developed differently or varied from the traditional pattern they deserved to be relegated to a secondary or satellite role in Cubism is a profound mistake."[54]
The history of the term "Cubism" usually stresses the fact that Matisse referred to "cubes" in connection with a painting by Braque in 1908, and that the term was published twice by the criticLouis Vauxcellesin a similar context. However, the word "cube" was used in 1906 by another critic, Louis Chassevent, with reference not to Picasso or Braque but rather to Metzinger and Delaunay:
The critical use of the word "cube" goes back at least to May 1901 when Jean Béral, reviewing the work ofHenri-Edmond Crossat the Indépendants inArt et Littérature, commented that he "uses a large and square pointillism, giving the impression of mosaic. One even wonders why the artist has not used cubes of solid matter diversely colored: they would make pretty revetments." (Robert Herbert, 1968, p. 221)[56]
The term Cubism did not come into general usage until 1911, mainly with reference to Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, and Léger.[54]In 1911, the poet and criticGuillaume Apollinaireaccepted the term on behalf of a group of artists invited to exhibit at the Brussels Indépendants. The following year, in preparation for the Salon de laSection d'Or, Metzinger and Gleizes wrote and publishedDu "Cubisme"[57]in an effort to dispel the confusion raging around the word, and as a major defence of Cubism (which had caused a public scandal following the 1911 Salon des Indépendants and the 1912 Salon d'Automne in Paris).[58]Clarifying their aims as artists, this work was the first theoretical treatise on Cubism and it still remains the clearest and most intelligible. The result, not solely a collaboration between its two authors, reflected discussions by the circle of artists who met inPuteauxandCourbevoie. It mirrored the attitudes of the "artists of Passy", which included Picabia and the Duchamp brothers, to whom sections of it were read prior to publication.[13][54]The concept developed inDu "Cubisme"of observing a subject from different points in space and time simultaneously, i.e., the act of moving around an object to seize it from several successive angles fused into a single image (multiple viewpoints, mobile perspective, simultaneity or multiplicity), is a generally recognized device used by the Cubists.[59]
The 1912 manifestoDu "Cubisme"by Metzinger and Gleizes was followed in 1913 byLes Peintres Cubistes, a collection of reflections and commentaries by Guillaume Apollinaire.[25]Apollinaire had been closely involved with Picasso beginning in 1905, and Braque beginning in 1907, but gave as much attention to artists such as Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay, Picabia, and Duchamp.[13]
The fact that the 1912 exhibition had been curated to show the successive stages through which Cubism had transited, and thatDu "Cubisme"had been published for the occasion, indicates the artists' intention of making their work comprehensible to a wide audience (art critics, art collectors, art dealers and the general public). Undoubtedly, due to the great success of the exhibition, Cubism became avant-garde movement recognized as a genre or style in art with a specific common philosophy or goal.[51]

## Crystal Cubism: 1914–1918
A significant modification of Cubism between 1914 and 1916 was signaled by a shift towards a strong emphasis on large overlapping geometric planes and flat surface activity. This grouping of styles of painting and sculpture, especially significant between 1917 and 1920, was practiced by several artists; particularly those under contract with the art dealer and collectorLéonce Rosenberg. The tightening of the compositions, the clarity and sense of order reflected in these works, led to its being referred to by the criticMaurice Raynalas 'crystal' Cubism. Considerations manifested by Cubists prior to the outset ofWorld War I—such as thefourth dimension, dynamism of modern life, the occult, andHenri Bergson's concept ofduration—had now been vacated, replaced by a purely formal frame of reference.[60]
Crystal Cubism, and its associativerappel à l'ordre, has been linked with an inclination—by those who served the armed forces and by those who remained in the civilian sector—to escape the realities of the Great War, both during and directly following the conflict. The purifying of Cubism from 1914 through the mid-1920s, with its cohesive unity and voluntary constraints, has been linked to a much broaderideologicaltransformation towardsconservatismin both French society andFrench culture.[13]

## Cubism after 1918
The most innovative period of Cubism was before 1914.[citation needed]After World War I, with the support given by the dealerLéonce Rosenberg, Cubism returned as a central issue for artists, and continued as such until the mid-1920s when its avant-garde status was rendered questionable by the emergence ofgeometric abstractionandSurrealisminParis. Many Cubists, including Picasso, Braque, Gris, Léger, Gleizes, Metzinger andEmilio Pettorutiwhile developing other styles, returned periodically to Cubism, even well after 1925. Cubism reemerged during the 1920s and the 1930s in the work of the AmericanStuart Davisand the EnglishmanBen Nicholson. In France, however, Cubism experienced a decline beginning in about 1925. Léonce Rosenberg exhibited not only the artists stranded by Kahnweiler's exile but others including Laurens, Lipchitz, Metzinger, Gleizes, Csaky, Herbin and Severini. In 1918 Rosenberg presented a series of Cubist exhibitions at his Galerie de l'Effort Moderne in Paris. Attempts were made by Louis Vauxcelles to argue that Cubism was dead, but these exhibitions, along with a well-organized Cubist show at the 1920 Salon des Indépendants and a revival of the Salon de la Section d'Or in the same year, demonstrated it was still alive.[13]
The reemergence of Cubism coincided with the appearance from about 1917 to 1924 of a coherent body of theoretical writing by Pierre Reverdy, Maurice Raynal and Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler and, among the artists, by Gris, Léger and Gleizes. The occasional return to classicism—figurative work either exclusively or alongside Cubist work—experienced by many artists during this period (calledNeoclassicism) has been linked to the tendency to evade the realities of the war and also to the cultural dominance of a classical or Latin image of France during and immediately following the war. Cubism after 1918 can be seen as part of a wide ideological shift towardsconservatismin bothFrenchsociety and culture. Yet, Cubism itself remained evolutionary both within the oeuvre of individual artists, such as Gris and Metzinger, and across the work of artists as different from each other as Braque, Léger and Gleizes. Cubism as a publicly debated movement became relatively unified and open to definition. Its theoretical purity made it a gauge against which such diverse tendencies asRealismorNaturalism,Dada,Surrealismand abstraction could be compared.[13]

## Influence in Asia
JapanandChinawere among the first countries in Asia to be influenced by Cubism. Contact first occurred via European texts translated and published in Japanese art journals in the 1910s. In the 1920s, Japanese and Chinese artists who studied in Paris, for example those enrolled at theÉcole nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts, brought back with them both an understanding of modern art movements, including Cubism. Notable works exhibiting Cubist qualities wereTetsugorō Yorozu'sSelf Portrait with Red Eyes(1912) andFang Ganmin'sMelody in Autumn(1934).[62][63]

## Intentions and criticism
The Cubism of Picasso and Braque had more than a technical or formal significance, and the distinct attitudes and intentions of the Salon Cubists produced different kinds of Cubism, rather than a derivative of their work. "It is by no means clear, in any case," wrote Christopher Green, "to what extent these other Cubists depended on Picasso and Braque for their development of such techniques as faceting, 'passage' and multiple perspective; they could well have arrived at such practices with little knowledge of 'true' Cubism in its early stages, guided above all by their own understanding of Cézanne." The works exhibited by these Cubists at the 1911 and 1912 Salons extended beyond the conventional Cézanne-like subjects—the posed model, still-life and landscape—favored by Picasso and Braque to include large-scale modern-life subjects. Aimed at a large public, these works stressed the use of multiple perspective and complex planar faceting for expressive effect while preserving the eloquence of subjects endowed with literary and philosophical connotations.[13]
InDu "Cubisme"Metzinger and Gleizes explicitly related the sense of time to multiple perspective, giving symbolic expression to the notion of 'duration' proposed by the philosopherHenri Bergsonaccording to which life is subjectively experienced as a continuum, with the past flowing into the present and the present merging into the future. The Salon Cubists used the faceted treatment of solid and space and effects of multiple viewpoints to convey a physical and psychological sense of the fluidity of consciousness, blurring the distinctions between past, present and future. One of the major theoretical innovations made by the Salon Cubists, independently of Picasso and Braque, was that ofsimultaneity,[13]drawing to greater or lesser extent on theories ofHenri Poincaré,Ernst Mach,Charles Henry,Maurice Princet, and Henri Bergson. With simultaneity, the concept of separate spatial and temporal dimensions was comprehensively challenged.Linear perspectivedeveloped duringthe Renaissancewas vacated. The subject matter was no longer considered from a specific point of view at a moment in time, but built following a selection of successive viewpoints, i.e., as if viewed simultaneously from numerous angles (and in multiple dimensions) with the eye free to roam from one to the other.[59]
This technique of representing simultaneity, multiple viewpoints (orrelative motion) is pushed to a high degree of complexity in Metzinger'sNu à la cheminée, exhibited at the 1910 Salon d'Automne; Gleizes' monumentalLe Dépiquage des Moissons (Harvest Threshing), exhibited at the 1912 Salon de la Section d'Or; Le Fauconnier'sAbundanceshown at the Indépendants of 1911; and Delaunay'sCity of Paris, exhibited at the Indépendants in 1912. These ambitious works are some of the largest paintings in the history of Cubism. Léger'sThe Wedding, also shown at the Salon des Indépendants in 1912, gave form to the notion of simultaneity by presenting different motifs as occurring within a single temporal frame, where responses to the past and present interpenetrate with collective force. The conjunction of such subject matter with simultaneity aligns Salon Cubism with early Futurist paintings byUmberto Boccioni, Gino Severini andCarlo Carrà; themselves made in response to early Cubism.[8]
Cubism andmodern European artwas introduced into the United States at the now legendary 1913Armory ShowinNew York City, which then traveled toChicagoandBoston. In the Armory ShowPablo PicassoexhibitedLa Femme au pot de moutarde(1910), the sculptureHead of a Woman (Fernande)(1909–10),Les Arbres(1907) amongst other cubist works.Jacques Villonexhibited seven important and large drypoints, while his brotherMarcel Duchampshocked the American public with his paintingNude Descending a Staircase, No. 2(1912).Francis Picabiaexhibited his abstractionsLa Danse à la sourceandLa Procession, Seville(both of 1912).Albert GleizesexhibitedLa Femme aux phlox(1910) andL'Homme au balcon(1912), two highly stylized and faceted cubist works.Georges Braque,Fernand Léger,Raymond Duchamp-Villon,Roger de La FresnayeandAlexander Archipenkoalso contributed examples of their cubist works.

## Cubist sculpture
Just as in painting, Cubist sculpture is rooted in Paul Cézanne's reduction of painted objects into component planes and geometric solids (cubes, spheres, cylinders, and cones). And just as in painting, it became a pervasive influence and contributed fundamentally toConstructivismandFuturism.
Cubist sculpture developed in parallel to Cubist painting. During the autumn of 1909 Picasso sculptedHead of a Woman (Fernande)with positive features depicted by negative space and vice versa. According to Douglas Cooper: "The first true Cubist sculpture was Picasso's impressiveWoman's Head, modeled in 1909–10, a counterpart in three dimensions to many similar analytical and faceted heads in his paintings at the time."[12]These positive/negative reversals were ambitiously exploited byAlexander Archipenkoin 1912–13, for example inWoman Walking.[13]Joseph Csaky, after Archipenko, was the first sculptor in Paris to join the Cubists, with whom he exhibited from 1911 onwards. They were followed byRaymond Duchamp-Villonand then in 1914 byJacques Lipchitz,Henri LaurensandOssip Zadkine.[66][67]
Indeed, Cubist construction was as influential as any pictorial Cubist innovation. It was the stimulus behind the proto-Constructivist work of bothNaum GaboandVladimir Tatlinand thus the starting-point for the entire constructive tendency in 20th-century modernist sculpture.[13]

## Architecture
Cubism formed an important link between early-20th-century art and architecture.[68]The historical, theoretical, and socio-political relationships between avant-garde practices in painting, sculpture and architecture had early ramifications in France, Germany, the Netherlands andCzechoslovakia. Though there are many points of intersection between Cubism and architecture, only a few direct links between them can be drawn. Most often the connections are made by reference to shared formal characteristics: faceting of form, spatial ambiguity, transparency, and multiplicity.[68]
Architectural interest in Cubism centered on the dissolution and reconstitution of three-dimensional form, using simple geometric shapes, juxtaposed without the illusions of classical perspective. Diverse elements could be superimposed, made transparent or penetrate one another, while retaining their spatial relationships. Cubism had become an influential factor in the development of modern architecture from 1912 (La Maison Cubiste, byRaymond Duchamp-VillonandAndré Mare) onwards, developing in parallel with architects such asPeter BehrensandWalter Gropius, with the simplification of building design, the use of materials appropriate to industrial production, and the increased use of glass.[69]
Cubism was relevant to an architecture seeking a style that needed not refer to the past. Thus, what had become a revolution in both painting and sculpture was applied as part of "a profound reorientation towards a changed world".[69][70]The Cubo-Futurist ideas ofFilippo Tommaso Marinettiinfluenced attitudes in avant-garde architecture. The influentialDe Stijlmovement embraced the aesthetic principles of Neo-plasticism developed byPiet Mondrianunder the influence of Cubism in Paris. De Stijl was also linked byGino Severinito Cubist theory through the writings of Albert Gleizes. However, the linking of basic geometric forms with inherent beauty and ease of industrial application—which had been prefigured by Marcel Duchamp from 1914—was left to the founders ofPurism,Amédée Ozenfantand Charles-Édouard Jeanneret (better known asLe Corbusier,) who exhibited paintings together in Paris and publishedAprès le cubismein 1918.[69]Le Corbusier's ambition had been to translate the properties of his own style of Cubism to architecture. Between 1918 and 1922, Le Corbusier concentrated his efforts on Purist theory and painting. In 1922, Le Corbusier and his cousin Jeanneret opened a studio in Paris at 35 rue de Sèvres. His theoretical studies soon advanced into many different architectural projects.[71]

## La Maison Cubiste (Cubist House)
At the 1912Salon d'Automnean architectural installation was exhibited that quickly became known asMaison Cubiste(Cubist House), with architecture byRaymond Duchamp-Villonand interior decoration byAndré Marealong with a group of collaborators. Metzinger and Gleizes inDu "Cubisme", written during the assemblage of the "Maison Cubiste", wrote about the autonomous nature of art, stressing the point that decorative considerations should not govern the spirit of art. Decorative work, to them, was the "antithesis of the picture". "The true picture" wrote Metzinger and Gleizes, "bears itsraison d'êtrewithin itself. It can be moved from a church to adrawing-room, from a museum to a study. Essentially independent, necessarily complete, it need not immediately satisfy the mind: on the contrary, it should lead it, little by little, towards the fictitious depths in which the coordinative light resides. It does not harmonize with this or that ensemble; it harmonizes with things in general, with the universe: it is an organism...".[72]
La Maison Cubistewas a fully furnished model house, with a  facade, a staircase, wrought iron banisters, and two rooms:  a living room—theSalon Bourgeois, where paintings by Marcel Duchamp, Metzinger (Woman with a Fan), Gleizes, Laurencin and Léger were hung, and a bedroom. It was an example ofL'art décoratif, a home within which Cubist art could be displayed in the comfort and style of modern, bourgeois life. Spectators at theSalon d'Automnepassed through the plaster facade, designed by Duchamp-Villon, to the two furnished rooms.[73]This architectural installation was subsequently exhibited at the 1913Armory Show, New York, Chicago and Boston,[74]listed in the catalogue of the New York exhibit as Raymond Duchamp-Villon, number 609, and entitled"Facade architectural, plaster"(Façade architecturale).[75][76]
The furnishings, wallpaper, upholstery and carpets of the interior were designed byAndré Mare, and were early examples of the influence of cubism on what would becomeArt Deco.  They were composed of very brightly colored roses and other floral patterns in stylized geometric forms.
Mare called the living room in which Cubist paintings were hung theSalon Bourgeois. Léger described this name as 'perfect'. In a letter to Mare prior to the exhibition Léger wrote: "Your idea is absolutely splendid for us, really splendid. People will see Cubism in its domestic setting, which is very important.[2]
"Mare's ensembles were accepted as frames for Cubist works because they allowed paintings and sculptures their independence", Christopher Green wrote, "creating a play of contrasts, hence the involvement not only of Gleizes and Metzinger themselves, but of Marie Laurencin, the Duchamp brothers (Raymond Duchamp-Villon designed the facade) and Mare's old friends Léger and Roger La Fresnaye".[77]
In 1927, CubistsJoseph Csaky,Jacques Lipchitz,Louis Marcoussis,Henri Laurens, the sculptorGustave Miklos, and others collaborated in the decoration of a Studio House, rue Saint-James,Neuilly-sur-Seine, designed by the architect Paul Ruaud and owned by the French fashion designerJacques Doucet, also a collector ofPost-Impressionistand Cubist paintings (includingLes Demoiselles d'Avignon, which he bought directly from Picasso's studio). Laurens designed the fountain, Csaky designed Doucet's staircase,[78]Lipchitz made the fireplace mantel, and Marcoussis made a Cubist rug.[79][80][81]

## Czech Cubist architecture
The original Cubist architecture is very rare. Cubism was applied to architecture only inBohemia(todayCzech Republic) and especially in its capital,Prague.[82][83]Czech architects were the first and only ones to ever design original Cubist buildings.[84]Cubist architecture flourished for the most part between 1910 and 1914, but the Cubist or Cubism-influenced buildings were also built afterWorld War I. After the war, the architectural style calledRondo-Cubismwas developed in Prague fusing the Cubist architecture with round shapes.[85]
In their theoretical rules, the Cubist architects expressed the requirement of dynamism, which would surmount the matter and calm contained in it, through a creative idea, so that the result would evoke feelings of dynamism and expressive plasticity in the viewer. This should be achieved by shapes derived from pyramids, cubes and prisms, by arrangements and compositions of oblique surfaces, mainly triangular, sculpted facades in protruding crystal-like units, reminiscent of the so-calleddiamond cut, or even cavernous that are reminiscent of the lateGothic architecture. In this way, the entire surfaces of the facades including even the gables and dormers are sculpted. The grilles as well as other architectural ornaments attain a three-dimensional form. Thus, new forms of windows and doors were also created, e. g.hexagonal windows.[85]Czech Cubist architects also designed Cubist furniture.
The leading Cubist architects werePavel Janák,Josef Gočár,Vlastislav Hofman,Emil KrálíčekandJosef Chochol.[85]They worked mostly in Prague but also in other Bohemian towns. The best-known Cubist building is theHouse of the Black Madonnain theOld Town of Praguebuilt in 1912 by Josef Gočár with the only Cubist café in the world, Grand Café Orient.[82]Vlastislav Hofman built the entrance pavilions ofĎáblice Cemeteryin 1912–1914, Josef Chochol designed several residential houses underVyšehrad. A Cubist streetlamp has also been preserved near theWenceslas Square, designed by Emil Králíček in 1912, who also built the Diamond House in theNew Town of Praguearound 1913.

## Cubism in other fields
The influence of Cubism extended to other artistic fields, outside painting and sculpture. In literature, the written works ofGertrude Steinemploy repetition and repetitive phrases as building blocks in both passages and whole chapters. Most of Stein's important works utilize this technique, including the novelThe Making of Americans(1906–08). Not only were they the first important patrons of Cubism, Gertrude Stein and her brotherLeowere also important influences on Cubism as well. In turn, Picasso was an important influence on Stein's writing. In the field of American fiction,William Faulkner's 1930 novelAs I Lay Dyingcan be read as an interaction with the cubist mode. The novel features narratives of the diverse experiences of 15 characters which, when taken together, produce a single cohesive body.
The poets generally associated with Cubism areGuillaume Apollinaire,Blaise Cendrars,Jean Cocteau,Max Weber,Jean Le Roy,Max Jacob,André SalmonandPierre Reverdy. As American poetKenneth Rexrothexplains, Cubism in poetry "is the conscious, deliberate dissociation and recombination of elements into a new artistic entity made self-sufficient by its rigorous architecture. This is quite different from the free association of the Surrealists and the combination of unconscious utterance and political nihilism of Dada."[86]Nonetheless, the Cubist poets' influence on both Cubism and the later movements ofDadaandSurrealismwas profound;Louis Aragon, founding member of Surrealism, said that for Breton, Soupault, Éluard and himself, Reverdy was "our immediate elder, the exemplary poet."[87]Though not as well remembered as the Cubist painters, these poets continue to influence and inspire; American poetsJohn AshberyandRon Padgetthave recently produced new translations ofReverdy'swork.Wallace Stevens' "Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird" is also said to demonstrate how cubism's multiple perspectives can be translated into poetry.[88]Ballet's first cubist sets and costumes were designed by Picasso in 1917 forSergei Diaghilev'sParade.[89]This preceded six more ballets in which Picasso "left a mark on the ballet world, influencing generations of designers and choreographers".[90]Braque followed suit with four ballets of his own commencing in 1924 Diaghliev'sLes Fâcheux.[91][92]Gris as well designed sets and costumes for Diaghilev'sBallet Russes.[93][94]Artists such as the prolific poster designersA.M. Cassandre[95]andEdward McKnight Kaufferpopularized Cubism in the fields of commercial graphic design andtypography.[96]Paul PoiretandCallot Soeurswere among the couturiers that brought cubist elements—such as overlapping layers and flat planes that obscure the volumes of the body—into the world of fashion design.[97]
John Bergersaid: "It is almost impossible to exaggerate the importance of Cubism. It was a revolution in the visual arts as great as that which took place in the earlyRenaissance. Its effects on later art, on film, and on architecture are already so numerous that we hardly notice them."[98]