## Documentary film
Adocumentary film(often described simply as adocumentary) is a nonfiction,motion pictureintended to "document reality, primarily for instruction, education or maintaining ahistorical record".[1]The Americanauthorandmedia analystBill Nicholshas characterized the documentary in terms of "afilmmakingpractice, a cinematic tradition, and mode of audience reception [that remains] a practice without clear boundaries".[2]
Research into information gathering, as abehavior, and the sharing ofknowledge, as aconcept, has noted how documentary movies were preceded by the notable practice ofdocumentary photography. This has involved the use of singularphotographsto detail the complex attributes ofhistorical eventsand continues to a certain degree to this day, with an example being theconflict-related photographyachieved by popular figures such asMathew Bradyduring theAmerican Civil War. Documentary movies evolved from the creation of singular images in order to convey particular types of information in depth, using film as a medium.
Early documentary films, originally called "actuality films", briefly lasted for one minute or less in most cases. While faithfully depicting true events, these releases possessed no narrative structure per se and were of limited interest. Over time, documentaries have evolved to become longer in length and to include more categories of information. Some examples are explicitlyeducational, while others serve asobservationalworks;docufictionmovies notably include aspects of dramatic storytelling that are clearly fictional. Documentaries areinformativeat times, and certain types are often used within schools as a resource to teach variousprinciples. Documentary filmmakers have a responsibility to be truthful to their vision of the world without intentionally misrepresenting a topic.
Social mediaorganizations, such asDailymotionandYouTube, with many of theseplatformsreceiving popular interest, have provided an avenue for the growth of documentaries as a particularfilm genre. Such platforms have increased the distribution area and ease-of-accessibility given the ability ofonline video sharingto spread to multiple audiences at once as well as to work past certain socio-political hurdles such ascensorship.

## Definition
Polish writer and filmmakerBolesław Matuszewskiwas among those who identified the mode of documentary film. He wrote two of the earliest texts on cinema,Une nouvelle source de l'histoire("A New Source of History") andLa photographie animée("Animated photography"). Both were published in 1898 in French and were among the earliest written works to consider the historical and documentary value of the film.[3]Matuszewski is also among the first filmmakers to propose the creation of a Film Archive to collect and keep safe visual materials.[4]
The word "documentary" was coined by Scottish documentary filmmakerJohn Griersonin his review ofRobert Flaherty's filmMoana(1926), published in theNew York Sunon 8 February 1926, written by "The Moviegoer" (a pen name for Grierson).[5][6]
Grierson's principles of documentary were that cinema's potential for observing life could be exploited in a new art form; that the "original" actor and "original" scene are better guides than their fiction counterparts for interpreting the modern world; and that materials "thus taken from the raw" can be more real than the acted article. In this regard, Grierson's definition of documentary as "creative treatment of actuality"[7]has gained some acceptance; however, this position is at variance with Soviet film-makerDziga Vertov's credos of provocation to present "life as it is" (that is, life filmed surreptitiously), and "life caught unawares" (life provoked or surprised by the camera).
The American film criticPare Lorentzdefines a documentary film as "a factual film which is dramatic."[8]Others further state that a documentary stands out from the other types of non-fiction films for providing an opinion, and a specific message, along with the facts it presents.[9]Scholar Betsy McLane asserted that documentaries are for filmmakers to convey their views about historical events, people, and places which they find significant.[10]Therefore, the advantage of documentaries lies in introducing new perspectives which may not be prevalent in traditional media such as written publications and school curricula.[11]
Documentary practice is the complex process of creating documentary projects. It refers to what people do with media devices, content, form, and production strategies to address the creative, ethical, and conceptual problems and choices that arise as they make documentaries.
Documentary filmmaking can be used as a form of journalism, advocacy, or personal expression.

## Pre-1900
Early film (pre-1900) was dominated by the novelty of showing an event. Single-shot moments were captured on film, such as a train entering a station, a boat docking, or factory workers leaving work. These short films were called "actuality" films; the term "documentary" was not coined until 1926. Many of the first films, such as those made byAuguste and Louis Lumière, were a minute or less in length, due to technological limitations.
Films showing many people (for example, leaving a factory) were often made for commercial reasons: the people being filmed were eager to see, for payment, the film showing them. One notable film clocked in at over an hour and a half,The Corbett-Fitzsimmons Fight. Using pioneering film-looping technology,Enoch J. Rectorpresented the entirety of a famous 1897 prize-fight on cinema screens across the United States.
In May 1896,Bolesław Matuszewskirecorded on film a few surgical operations inWarsawandSaint Petersburghospitals. In 1898, French surgeonEugène-Louis Doyeninvited Matuszewski andClément Mauriceto record his surgical operations. They started in Paris a series of surgical films sometime before July 1898.[12]Until 1906, the year of his last film, Doyen recorded more than 60 operations. Doyen said that his first films taught him how to correct professional errors he had been unaware of. For scientific purposes, after 1906, Doyen combined 15 of his films into three compilations, two of which survive, the six-film seriesExtirpation des tumeurs encapsulées(1906), and the four-filmLes Opérations sur la cavité crânienne(1911). These and five other of Doyen's films survive.[13]
Between July 1898 and 1901, the Romanian professorGheorghe Marinescumade several science films in hisneurologyclinic inBucharest:[14]Walking Troubles of Organic Hemiplegy(1898),The Walking Troubles of Organic Paraplegies(1899),A Case of Hysteric Hemiplegy Healed Through Hypnosis(1899),The Walking Troubles of Progressive Locomotion Ataxy(1900), andIllnesses of the Muscles(1901). All these short films have been preserved. The professor called his works "studies with the help of the cinematograph," and published the results, along with several consecutive frames, in issues ofLa Semaine Médicalemagazine from Paris, between 1899 and 1902.[15]In 1924, Auguste Lumière recognized the merits of Marinescu's science films: "I've seen your scientific reports about the usage of the cinematograph in studies of nervous illnesses, when I was still receivingLa Semaine Médicale, but back then I had other concerns, which left me no spare time to begin biological studies. I must say I forgot those works and I am thankful to you that you reminded them to me. Unfortunately, not many scientists have followed your way."[16][17][18]

## 1900–1920
Travelogue filmswere very popular in the early part of the 20th century. They were often referred to by distributors as "scenics". Scenics were among the most popular sort of films at the time.[19]An important early film which moved beyond the concept of the scenic wasIn the Land of the Head Hunters(1914), which embracedprimitivismandexoticismin a staged story presented as truthful re-enactments of the life ofNative Americans.
Contemplation is a separate area.[further explanation needed]Pathéwas the best-known global manufacturer of such films in the early 20th century. A vivid example isMoscow Clad in Snow(1909).
Biographical documentaries appeared during this time, such as the featureEminescu-Veronica-Creangă(1914) on the relationship between the writersMihai Eminescu,Veronica MicleandIon Creangă(all deceased at the time of the production), released by theBucharestchapter ofPathé.
Early color motion picture processes such asKinemacolor(known for the featureWith Our King and Queen Through India(1912)) andPrizmaColor (known forEverywhere With Prizma(1919) and the five-reel featureBali the Unknown(1921)) used travelogues to promote the new color processes. In contrast,Technicolorconcentrated primarily on getting their process adopted by Hollywood studios for fiction feature films.
Also during this period,Frank Hurley's feature documentary film,South(1919) about theImperial Trans-Antarctic Expeditionwas released. The film documented the failed Antarctic expedition led byErnest Shackletonin 1914.

## Romanticism
WithRobert J. Flaherty'sNanook of the Northin 1922, documentary film embracedromanticism. Flaherty filmed a number of heavily staged romantic documentary films during this time period, often showing how his subjects would have lived 100 years earlier and not how they lived right then. For instance, inNanook of the North, Flaherty did not allow his subjects to shoot a walrus with a nearby shotgun, but had them use a harpoon instead. Some of Flaherty's staging, such as building a rooflessigloofor interior shots, was done to accommodate the filming technology of the time.
Paramount Picturestried to repeat the success of Flaherty'sNanookandMoanawith two romanticized documentaries,Grass(1925) andChang(1927), both directed byMerian C. CooperandErnest Schoedsack.

## City symphony
The "city symphony" subfilm genreconsisted ofavant-garde filmsduring the 1920s and 1930s. These films were particularly influenced bymodern art, namelyCubism,Constructivism, andImpressionism.[20]According toart historianand authorScott MacDonald,[21]city symphony films can be described as, "An intersection between documentary and avant-garde film: anavant-doc"; however, A.L. Rees suggests regarding them as avant-garde films.[20]
Early titles produced within this genre include:Manhatta(New York; dir.Paul Strand, 1921);Rien que les heures/Nothing But The Hours(France; dir.Alberto Cavalcanti, 1926);Twenty Four Dollar Island(dir.Robert J. Flaherty, 1927);Moscow(dir.Mikhail Kaufman, 1927);Études sur Paris(dir.André Sauvage, 1928);The Bridge(1928) andRain(1929), both byJoris Ivens;São Paulo, Sinfonia da Metrópole(dir.Adalberto Kemeny, 1929),Berlin: Symphony of a Metropolis(dir.Walter Ruttmann, 1927);Man with a Movie Camera(dir.Dziga Vertov, 1929);Douro, Faina Fluvial(dir.Manoel de Oliveira, 1931); andRhapsody in Two Languages(dir.Gordon Sparling, 1934).
A city symphony film, as the name suggests, is most often based around a majormetropolitan cityarea and seeks to capture the life, events and activities of the city. It can useabstractcinematography (Walter Ruttman'sBerlin) or may useSoviet montage theory(Dziga Vertov's,Man with a Movie Camera).  Most importantly, a city symphony film is a form ofcinepoetry, shot and edited in the style of a "symphony".
The European continental tradition (See:Realism) focused on humans within human-made environments, and included the so-called city symphony films such as Walter Ruttmann's,Berlin: Symphony of a Metropolis(of whichGriersonnoted in an article[22]thatBerlin,represented what a documentary should not be); Alberto Cavalcanti's,Rien que les heures;and Dziga Vertov'sMan with a Movie Camera. These films tend to feature people as products of their environment, and lean towards the avant-garde.

## Kino-Pravda
Dziga Vertovwas central to the SovietKino-Pravda(literally, "cinematic truth") newsreel series of the 1920s. Vertov believed the camera – with its varied lenses, shot-counter shot editing, time-lapse, ability to slow motion, stop motion and fast-motion – could render reality more accurately than the human eye, and created a film philosophy from it.

## Newsreel tradition
Thenewsreeltradition is important in documentary film. Newsreels at this time were sometimes staged but were usually re-enactments of events that had already happened, not attempts to steer events as they were in the process of happening. For instance, much of the battle footage from the early 20th century was staged; the cameramen would usually arrive on site after a major battle and re-enact scenes to film them.

## 1930s–1940s
The propagandist tradition consists of films made with the explicit purpose of persuading an audience of a point. One of the most celebrated and controversialpropaganda filmsisLeni Riefenstahl's filmTriumph of the Will(1935), which chronicled the 1934Nazi Party Congressand was commissioned byAdolf Hitler. Leftist filmmakersJoris IvensandHenri StorckdirectedBorinage(1931) about the Belgian coal mining region.Luis Buñueldirected a "surrealist" documentaryLas Hurdes(1933).
Pare Lorentz'sThe Plow That Broke the Plains(1936) andThe River(1938) andWillard Van Dyke'sThe City(1939) are notableNew Dealproductions, each presenting complex combinations of social and ecological awareness, government propaganda, and leftist viewpoints.Frank Capra'sWhy We Fight(1942–1944) series was a newsreel series in the United States, commissioned by the government to convince the U.S. public that it was time to go to war.Constance Bennettand her husbandHenri de la Falaiseproduced two feature-length documentaries,Legong: Dance of the Virgins(1935) filmed inBali, andKilou the Killer Tiger(1936) filmed inIndochina.
In Canada, theFilm Board, set up by John Grierson, was set up for the same propaganda reasons. It also created newsreels that were seen by their national governments as legitimate counter-propaganda to the psychological warfare ofNaziGermany orchestrated byJoseph Goebbels.
In Britain, a number of different filmmakers came together under John Grierson. They became known as theDocumentary Film Movement. Grierson,Alberto Cavalcanti,Harry Watt,Basil Wright, andHumphrey Jenningsamongst others succeeded in blending propaganda, information, and education with a more poetic aesthetic approach to documentary. Examples of their work includeDrifters(John Grierson),Song of Ceylon(Basil Wright),Fires Were Started, andA Diary for Timothy(Humphrey Jennings). Their work involved poets such asW. H. Auden, composers such asBenjamin Britten, and writers such asJ. B. Priestley. Among the best known films of the movement areNight MailandCoal Face.
Calling Mr. Smith(1943) is an anti-Nazi color film[23][24][25]created byStefan Themersonwhich is both a documentary and an avant-garde film against war. It was one of the first anti-Nazi films in history.[citation needed]

## Cinéma-vérité
Cinéma vérité(or the closely relateddirect cinema) was dependent on some technical advances to exist: light, quiet and reliable cameras, and portable sync sound.
Cinéma vérité and similar documentary traditions can thus be seen, in a broader perspective, as a reaction against studio-based film production constraints. Shooting on location, with smaller crews, would also happen in theFrench New Wave, the filmmakers taking advantage of advances in technology allowing smaller, handheld cameras and synchronized sound to film events on location as they unfolded.
Although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably, there are important differences between cinéma vérité (Jean Rouch) and the North American "direct cinema", pioneered by, among others, CanadiansMichel Brault,Pierre PerraultandAllan King,[29]and AmericansRobert Drew,Richard Leacock,Frederick WisemanandAlbert and David Maysles.
The directors of the movement take different viewpoints on their degree of involvement with their subjects. Kopple and Pennebaker, for instance, choose non-involvement (or at least no overt involvement), and Perrault, Rouch, Koenig, and Kroitor favor direct involvement or even provocation when they deem it necessary.
The filmsChronicle of a Summer(Jean Rouch),Dont Look Back(D. A. Pennebaker),Grey Gardens(Albert and David Maysles),Titicut Follies(Frederick Wiseman),PrimaryandCrisis: Behind a Presidential Commitment(both produced byRobert Drew),Harlan County, USA(directed byBarbara Kopple),Lonely Boy(Wolf KoenigandRoman Kroitor) are all frequently deemedcinéma véritéfilms.
The fundamentals of the style include following a person during a crisis with a moving, often handheld, camera to capture more personal reactions. There are no sit-down interviews, and theshooting ratio(the amount of film shot to the finished product) is very high, often reaching 80 to one. From there, editors find and sculpt the work into a film. The editors of the movement – such asWerner Nold,Charlotte Zwerin,Muffie Meyer,Susan Froemke, andEllen Hovde– are often overlooked, but their input to the films was so vital that they were often given co-director credits.
Famous cinéma vérité/direct cinema films includeThe Snowshoers(Les Raquetteurs),[30]Showman,Salesman,Near Death, andThe Children Were Watching.

## Political weapons
In the 1960s and 1970s, documentary film was often regarded as a political weapon againstneocolonialismandcapitalismin general, especially in Latin America, but also in a changing society.La Hora de los hornos(The Hour of the Furnaces, from 1968), directed byOctavio GetinoandFernando Solanas, influenced a whole generation of filmmakers. Among the many political documentaries produced in the early 1970s was "Chile: A Special Report", public television's first in-depth expository look at the September 1973 overthrow of theSalvador Allendegovernment in Chile by military leaders underAugusto Pinochet, produced by documentarians Ari Martinez and José Garcia.
A June 2020 article inThe New York Timesreviewed the political documentaryAnd She Could Be Next, directed by Grace Lee and Marjan Safinia. TheTimesdescribed the documentary not only as focusing on women in politics, but more specifically on women of color, their communities, and the significant changes they have wrought upon America.[31]

## Modern documentaries
Box office analysts have noted that the documentary film genre has become increasingly successful in theatrical release with films such asFahrenheit 9/11,Super Size Me,Food, Inc.,Earth,March of the Penguins, andAn Inconvenient Truthamong the most prominent examples. Compared to dramatic narrative films, documentaries typically have far lower budgets which makes them attractive to film companies because even a limited theatrical release can be highly profitable.
The nature of documentary films has expanded in the past 30 years from the cinéma vérité style introduced in the 1960s in which the use of portable camera and sound equipment allowed an intimate relationship between filmmaker and subject. The line blurs between documentary and narrative and some works are very personal, such asMarlon Riggs'sTongues Untied(1989) andBlack Is...Black Ain't(1995), which mix expressive, poetic, and rhetorical elements and stresses subjectivities rather than historical materials.[32]
Historical documentaries, such as the landmark 14-hourEyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years(1986 – Part 1 and 1989 – Part 2) by Henry Hampton,4 Little Girls(1997) bySpike Lee,The Civil WarbyKen Burns, and UNESCO-awarded independent film on slavery500 Years Later, express not only a distinctive voice but also a perspective and point of views. Some films such asThe Thin Blue LinebyErrol Morrisincorporate stylized re-enactments, andMichael Moore'sRoger & Meplace far more interpretive control with the director. The commercial success of these documentaries may derive from this narrative shift in the documentary form, leading some critics to question whether such films can truly be called documentaries; critics sometimes refer to these works as "mondo films" or "docu-ganda."[33]However, directorial manipulation of documentary subjects has been noted since the work of Flaherty, and may be endemic to the form due to problematic ontological foundations.
Documentary filmmakers are increasingly using social impact campaigns with their films.[34]Social impact campaigns seek to leverage media projects by converting public awareness of social issues and causes into engagement and action, largely by offering the audience a way to get involved.[35]Examples of such documentaries includeKony 2012,Salam Neighbor,Gasland,Living on One Dollar, andGirl Rising.
Although documentaries are financially more viable with the increasing popularity of the genre and the advent of the DVD, funding for documentary film production remains elusive. Within the past decade, the largest exhibition opportunities have emerged from within the broadcast market, making filmmakers beholden to the tastes and influences of the broadcasters who have become their largest funding source.[36]
Modern documentaries have some overlap with television forms, with the development of "reality television" that occasionally verges on the documentary but more often veers to the fictional or staged. The "making-of" documentary shows how a movie or acomputer gamewas produced. Usually made for promotional purposes, it is closer to an advertisement than a classic documentary.
Modern lightweight digital video cameras and computer-based editing have greatly aided documentary makers, as has the dramatic drop in equipment prices. The first film to take full advantage of this change wasMartin KunertandEric Manes'Voices of Iraq, where 150 DV cameras were sent to Iraq during the war and passed out to Iraqis to record themselves.

## Documentaries without words
Films in the documentary form without words have been made.Listen to Britain, directed by Humphrey Jennings and Stuart McAllister in 1942, is a wordless meditation on wartime Britain. From 1982, theQatsi trilogyand the similarBarakacould be described as visual tone poems, with music related to the images, but no spoken content.Koyaanisqatsi(part of theQatsi trilogy) consists primarily ofslow motionandtime-lapse photographyof cities and many natural landscapes across the United States.Barakatries to capture the great pulse of humanity as it flocks and swarms in daily activity and religious ceremonies.
Bodysongwas made in 2003 and won a British Independent Film Award for "Best British Documentary."
The 2004 filmGenesisshows animal and plant life in states of expansion, decay, sex, and death, with some, but little, narration.

## Narration styles
The traditional style fornarrationis to have a dedicated narrator read a script which is dubbed onto the audio track. The narrator never appears on camera and may not necessarily have knowledge of the subject matter or involvement in the writing of the script.
This style of narration usestitle screensto visually narrate the documentary. The screens are held for about 5–10 seconds to allow adequate time for the viewer to read them. They are similar to the ones shown at the end of movies based on true stories, but they are shown throughout, typically between scenes.
In this style, there is a host who appears on camera, conducts interviews, and who also does voice-overs.

## Hybrid documentary
The release ofThe Thin Blue Line(1988) directed byErrol Morrisintroduced possibilities for emerging forms of the hybrid documentary. Indeed, it was disqualified for an Academy Award because of the stylized recreations. Traditional documentary filmmaking typically removes signs of fictionalization to distinguish itself from fictional film genres. Audiences have recently become more distrustful of the media's traditional fact production, making them more receptive to experimental ways of telling facts. The hybrid documentary implements truth games to challenge traditional fact production. Although it is fact-based, the hybrid documentary is not explicit about what should be understood, creating an open dialogue between subject and audience.[37]Clio Barnard'sThe Arbor(2010),Joshua Oppenheimer'sThe Act of Killing(2012),Mads Brügger'sThe Ambassador, andAlma Har'el'sBombay Beach(2011) are a few notable examples.[37]

## Docufiction
Docufictionis ahybridgenre from two basic ones,fiction filmand documentary, practiced since the first documentary films were made.

## Fake-fiction
Fake-fiction is a genre which deliberately presents real, unscripted events in the form of a fiction film, making them appear as staged. The concept was introduced[38]byPierre Bismuthto describe his 2016 filmWhere is Rocky II?

## DVD documentary
A DVD documentary is a documentary film of indeterminate length that has been produced with the sole intent of releasing it for direct sale to the public on DVD, which is different from a documentary being made and released first on television or on a cinema screen (a.k.a.theatrical release) and subsequently on DVD for public consumption.
This form of documentary release is becoming more popular and accepted as costs and difficulty with finding TV or theatrical release slots increases. It is also commonly used for more "specialist" documentaries, which might not have general interest to a wider TV audience. Examples are military, cultural arts, transport, sports, animals, etc.

## Compilation films
Compilation films were pioneered in 1927 byEsfir SchubwithThe Fall of the Romanov Dynasty. More recent examples includePoint of Order!(1964), directed byEmile de Antonioabout the McCarthy hearings. Similarly,The Last Cigarettecombines the testimony of various tobacco company executives before theU.S. Congresswith archival propaganda extolling the virtues of smoking.
Poetic documentaries, which first appeared in the 1920s, were a sort of reaction against both the content and the rapidly crystallizing grammar of the early fiction film. The poetic mode moved away from continuity editing and instead organized images of the material world by means of associations and patterns, both in terms of time and space. Well-rounded characters – "lifelike people" – were absent; instead, people appeared in these films as entities, just like any other, that are found in the material world. The films were fragmentary, impressionistic, lyrical. Their disruption of the coherence of time and space – a coherence favored by the fiction films of the day – can also be seen as an element of the modernist counter-model of cinematic narrative. The "real world" – Nichols calls it the "historical world" – was broken up into fragments and aesthetically reconstituted using film form. Examples of this style include Joris Ivens'Rain(1928), which records a passing summer shower over Amsterdam;László Moholy-Nagy'sPlay of Light: Black, White, Grey (1930), in which he films one of his own kinetic sculptures, emphasizing not the sculpture itself but the play of light around it;Oskar Fischinger's abstract animated films; Francis Thompson'sN.Y., N.Y.(1957), acity symphonyfilm; andChris Marker'sSans Soleil(1982).
Expository documentaries speak directly to the viewer, often in the form of an authoritative commentary employing voiceover or titles, proposing a strong argument and point of view. These films are rhetorical, and try to persuade the viewer. (They may use a rich and sonorous male voice.) The (voice-of-God) commentary often sounds "objective" and omniscient. Images are often not paramount; they exist to advance the argument. The rhetoric insistently presses upon us to read the images in a certain fashion. Historical documentaries in this mode deliver an unproblematic and "objective" account and interpretation of past events.
Examples: TV shows and films likeBiography,America's Most Wanted, many science and nature documentaries,Ken Burns'The Civil War(1990),Robert Hughes'The Shock of the New(1980),John Berger'sWays of Seeing(1972),Frank Capra's wartimeWhy We Fightseries, andPare Lorentz'sThe Plow That Broke the Plains(1936).

## Observational
Observational documentaries attempt to spontaneously observe their subjects with minimal intervention. Filmmakers who worked in this subgenre often saw the poetic mode as too abstract and the expository mode as too didactic. The first observational docs date back to the 1960s; the technological developments which made them possible include mobile lightweight cameras and portable sound recording equipment for synchronized sound. Often, this mode of film eschewed voice-over commentary, post-synchronized dialogue and music, or re-enactments. The films aimed for immediacy, intimacy, and revelation of individual human character in ordinary life situations.

## Types
Participatory documentariesbelieve that it is impossible for the act of filmmaking to not influence or alter the events being filmed. What these films do is emulate the approach of the anthropologist: participant-observation. Not only is the filmmaker part of the film, we also get a sense of how situations in the film are affected or altered by their presence. Nichols: "The filmmaker steps out from behind the cloak of voice-over commentary, steps away from poetic meditation, steps down from a fly-on-the-wall perch, and becomes a social actor (almost) like any other. (Almost like any other because the filmmaker retains the camera, and with it, a certain degree of potential power and control over events.)" The encounter between filmmaker and subject becomes a critical element of the film. Rouch and Morin named the approach cinéma vérité, translating Dziga Vertov's kinopravda into French; the "truth" refers to the truth of the encounter rather than some absolute truth.
Reflexive documentariesdo not see themselves as a transparent window on the world; instead, they draw attention to their own constructedness, and the fact that they are representations. How does the world get represented by documentary films? This question is central to this subgenre of films. They prompt us to "question the authenticity of documentary in general." It is the most self-conscious of all the modes, and is highly skeptical of "realism". It may use Brechtian alienation strategies to jar us, in order to "defamiliarize" what we are seeing and how we are seeing it.
Performative documentariesstress subjective experience and emotional response to the world. They are strongly personal, unconventional, perhaps poetic and/or experimental, and might include hypothetical enactments of events designed to make us experience what it might be like for us to possess a certain specific perspective on the world that is not our own, e.g. that of black, gay men in Marlon Riggs'sTongues Untied(1989) or Jenny Livingston'sParis Is Burning(1991). This subgenre might also lend itself to certain groups (e.g. women, ethnic minorities, gays and lesbians, etc.) to "speak about themselves". Often, a battery of techniques, many borrowed from fiction or avant-garde films, are used. Performative docs often link up personal accounts or experiences with larger political or historical realities.

## Educational films
Documentaries are shown in schools around the world in order to educate students. Used to introduce various topics to children, they are often used with a school lesson or shown many times to reinforce an idea.

## Translation
There are several challenges associated with translation of documentaries. The main two are working conditions and problems with terminology.

## Working conditions
Documentary translators very often have to meet tight deadlines. Normally, the translator has between five and seven days to hand over the translation of a 90-minute programme. Dubbing studios typically give translators a week to translate a documentary, but in order to earn a good salary, translators have to deliver their translations in a much shorter period, usually when the studio decides to deliver the final programme to the client sooner or when the broadcasting channel sets a tight deadline, e.g. on documentaries discussing the latest news.[39]
Another problem is the lack of postproduction script or the poor quality of the transcription. A correct transcription is essential for a translator to do their work properly, however many times the script is not even given to the translator, which is a major impediment since documentaries are characterised by "the abundance of terminological units and very specific proper names".[40]When the script is given to the translator, it is usually poorly transcribed or outright incorrect making the translation unnecessarily difficult and demanding because all of the proper names and specific terminology have to be correct in a documentary programme in order for it to be a reliable source of information, hence the translator has to check every term on their own. Such mistakes in proper names are for instance: "Jungle Reinhard instead of Django Reinhart, Jorn Asten instead of Jane Austen, and Magnus Axle instead of Aldous Huxley".[40]

## Terminology
The process of translation of a documentary programme requires working with very specific, often scientific terminology. Documentary translators are not usually specialists in a given field. Therefore, they are compelled to undertake extensive research whenever asked to make a translation of a specific documentary programme in order to understand it correctly and deliver the final product free of mistakes and inaccuracies. Generally, documentaries contain a large number of specific terms, with which translators have to familiarise themselves on their own, for example:
The documentaryBeetles, Record Breakersmakes use of 15 different terms to refer to beetles in less than 30 minutes (longhorn beetle, cellar beetle, stag beetle, burying beetle or gravediggers, sexton beetle, tiger beetle, bloody nose beetle, tortoise beetle, diving beetle, devil's coach horse, weevil, click beetle, malachite beetle, oil beetle, cockchafer), apart from mentioning other animals such as horseshoe bats or meadow brown butterflies.[41]
This poses a real challenge for the translators because they have to render the meaning, i.e. find an equivalent, of a very specific, scientific term in the target language and frequently the narrator uses a more general name instead of a specific term and the translator has to rely on the image presented in the programme to understand which term is being discussed in order to transpose it in the target language accordingly.[42]Additionally, translators of minorised languages often have to face another problem: some terms may not even exist in the target language. In such cases, they have to create new terminology or consult specialists to find proper solutions. Also, sometimes the official nomenclature differs from the terminology used by actual specialists, which leaves the translator to decide between using the official vocabulary that can be found in the dictionary, or rather opting for spontaneous expressions used by real experts in real life situations.[43]