## Electromagnetic spectrum
Theelectromagnetic spectrumis the full range ofelectromagnetic radiation, organized byfrequencyorwavelength. The spectrum is divided into separate bands, with different names for the electromagnetic waves within each band. From low to high frequency these are:radio waves,microwaves,infrared,visible light,ultraviolet,X-rays, andgamma rays. The electromagnetic waves in each of these bands have different characteristics, such as how they are produced, how they interact with matter, and their practical applications.
Radio waves, at the low-frequency end of the spectrum, have the lowestphoton energyand the longest wavelengths—thousands ofkilometers, or more. They can be emitted and received byantennas, and pass through the atmosphere, foliage, and most building materials.
Gamma rays, at the high-frequency end of the spectrum, have the highest photon energies and the shortest wavelengths—much smaller than anatomic nucleus. Gamma rays, X-rays, and extreme ultraviolet rays are calledionizing radiationbecause their high photon energy is able toionizeatoms, causing chemical reactions. Longer-wavelength radiation such as visible light is non-ionizing; the photons do not have sufficient energy to ionize atoms.
Throughout most of the electromagnetic spectrum,spectroscopycan be used to separate waves of different frequencies, so that the intensity of the radiation can be measured as a function of frequency or wavelength. Spectroscopy is used to study the interactions of electromagnetic waves with matter.[1]

## History and discovery
Humans have always been aware ofvisible lightandradiant heatbut for most of history it was not known that these phenomena were connected or were representatives of a more extensive principle. Theancient Greeksrecognized that light traveled in straight lines and studied some of its properties, includingreflectionandrefraction. Light was intensively studied from the beginning of the 17th century leading to the invention of important instruments like thetelescopeandmicroscope.Isaac Newtonwas the first to use the termspectrumfor the range of colours that white light could be split into with aprism. Starting in 1666, Newton showed that these colours were intrinsic to light and could be recombined into white light. A debate arose over whether light had a wave nature or a particle nature withRené Descartes,Robert HookeandChristiaan Huygensfavouring a wave description and Newton favouring a particle description. Huygens in particular had a well developed theory from which he was able to derive the laws of reflection and refraction. Around 1801,Thomas Youngmeasured thewavelengthof a light beam with histwo-slit experimentthus conclusively demonstrating that light was a wave.
In 1800,William Herscheldiscoveredinfraredradiation.[2]He was studying the temperature of different colours by moving a thermometer through light split by a prism. He noticed that the highest temperature was beyond red. He theorized that this temperature change was due to "calorific rays", a type of light ray that could not be seen. The next year,Johann Ritter, working at the other end of the spectrum, noticed what he called "chemical rays" (invisible light rays that induced certain chemical reactions). These behaved similarly to visible violet light rays, but were beyond them in the spectrum.[3]They were later renamedultravioletradiation.
The study ofelectromagnetismbegan in 1820 whenHans Christian Ørsteddiscovered thatelectric currentsproducemagnetic fields(Oersted's law). Light was first linked to electromagnetism in 1845, whenMichael Faradaynoticed that thepolarization of lighttraveling through a transparent material responded to a magnetic field (seeFaraday effect). During the 1860s,James Clerk Maxwelldeveloped four partialdifferential equations(Maxwell's equations) for theelectromagnetic field. Two of these equations predicted the possibility and behavior of waves in the field. Analyzing the speed of these theoretical waves, Maxwell realized that they must travel at a speed that was about the knownspeed of light. This startling coincidence in value led Maxwell to make the inference that light itself is a type of electromagnetic wave. Maxwell's equations predicted an infinite range of frequencies ofelectromagnetic waves, all traveling at the speed of light. This was the first indication of the existence of the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
Maxwell's predicted waves included waves at very low frequencies compared to infrared, which he hypothesized might be created by oscillating charges. Attempting to prove Maxwell's equations and detect such low frequency electromagnetic radiation, in 1886, the physicistHeinrich Hertzbuilt an apparatus to generate and detect what are now calledradio waves. Hertz found the waves and was able to infer (by measuring their wavelength and multiplying it by their frequency) that they traveled at the speed of light. Hertz also demonstrated that the new radiation could be both reflected and refracted by variousdielectric media, in the same manner as light. For example, Hertz was able to focus the waves using a lens made of treeresin. In a later experiment, Hertz similarly produced and measured the properties ofmicrowaves. These new types of waves paved the way for inventions such as thewireless telegraphand theradio.
In 1895,Wilhelm Röntgennoticed a new type of radiation emitted during an experiment with anevacuated tubesubjected to ahigh voltage. He called this radiation "x-rays" and found that they were able to travel through parts of the human body but were reflected or stopped by denser matter such as bones. Before long, many uses were found for thisradiography.
The last portion of the electromagnetic spectrum was filled in with the discovery ofgamma rays. In 1900,Paul Villardwas studying the radioactive emissions ofradiumwhen he identified a new type of radiation that he at first thought consisted of particles similar to knownalphaandbeta particles, but with the power of being far more penetrating than either. However, in 1910, British physicistWilliam Henry Braggdemonstrated that gamma rays are electromagnetic radiation, not particles, and in 1914,Ernest Rutherford(who had named them gamma rays in 1903 when he realized that they were fundamentally different from charged alpha and beta particles) andEdward Andrademeasured their wavelengths, and found that gamma rays were similar to X-rays, but with shorter wavelengths.
The wave-particle debate was rekindled in 1901 whenMax Planckdiscovered that light is absorbed only in discrete "quanta", now calledphotons, implying that light has a particle nature. This idea was made explicit byAlbert Einsteinin 1905, but never accepted by Planck and many other contemporaries. The modern position ofscienceis that electromagnetic radiation has both a wave and a particle nature, thewave-particle duality. The contradictions arising from this position are still being debated by scientists and philosophers.

## Range
Electromagnetic waves are typically described by any of the following three physical properties: thefrequencyf,wavelengthλ, orphoton energyE. Frequencies observed in astronomy range from2.4×1023Hz(1GeVgamma rays) down to the localplasma frequencyof the ionizedinterstellar medium(~1 kHz). Wavelength is inversely proportional to the wave frequency,[1]so gamma rays have very short wavelengths that are fractions of the size ofatoms, whereas wavelengths on the opposite end of the spectrum can be indefinitely long. Photon energy is directly proportional to the wave frequency, so gamma ray photons have the highest energy (around a billionelectron volts), while radio wave photons have very low energy (around afemtoelectronvolt). These relations are illustrated by the following equations:
where:
Whenever electromagnetic waves travel in amediumwithmatter, their wavelength is decreased. Wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation, whatever medium they are traveling through, are usually quoted in terms of thevacuum wavelength, although this is not always explicitly stated.
Generally, electromagnetic radiation is classified by wavelength intoradio wave,microwave,infrared,visible light,ultraviolet,X-raysandgamma rays. The behavior of EM radiation depends on its wavelength. When EM radiation interacts with single atoms andmolecules, its behavior also depends on the amount of energy per quantum (photon) it carries.
Spectroscopycan detect a much wider region of the EM spectrum than the visible wavelength range of 400nmto 700 nm in a vacuum. A common laboratory spectroscope can detect wavelengths from 2 nm to 2500 nm.[1]Detailed information about the physical properties of objects, gases, or even stars can be obtained from this type of device. Spectroscopes are widely used inastrophysics. For example, manyhydrogenatomsemitaradio wavephoton that has a wavelength of 21.12 cm. Also, frequencies of 30Hzand below can be produced by and are important in the study of certain stellar nebulae[4]and frequencies as high as2.9×1027Hzhave been detected from astrophysical sources.[5]

## Regions
The types of electromagnetic radiation are broadly classified into the following classes (regions, bands or types):[1]
This classification goes in the increasing order of wavelength, which is characteristic of the type of radiation.[1]
There are no precisely defined boundaries between the bands of the electromagnetic spectrum; rather they fade into each other like the bands in arainbow. Radiation of each frequency and wavelength (or in each band) has a mix of properties of the two regions of the spectrum that bound it. For example, red light resembles infrared radiation, in that it can excite and add energy to somechemical bondsand indeed must do so to power the chemical mechanisms responsible forphotosynthesisand the working of thevisual system.
In atomic and nuclear physics, the distinction between X-rays and gamma rays is based on sources: the photons generated fromnuclear decayor other nuclear and subnuclear/particle process are termed gamma rays, whereas X-rays are generated byelectronictransitions involving energetically deep inner atomic electrons.[6][7]Electronic transitions inmuonic atomstransitions are also said to produce X-rays.[8]In astrophysics, energies below 100keV are called X-rays and higher energies are gamma rays.[9]
The region of the spectrum where electromagnetic radiation is observed may differ from the region it was emitted in due to relative velocity of the source and observer, (theDoppler shift), relative gravitational potential (gravitational redshift), or expansion of the universe (cosmological redshift).[9]: 543For example, thecosmic microwave background, relicblackbody radiationfrom the era ofrecombination, started out at energies around 1eV, but as has undergone enough cosmologicalred shiftto put it into the microwave region of the spectrum for observers on Earth.[10]

## Rationale for names
Electromagnetic radiation interacts with matter in different ways across the spectrum. These types of interaction are so different that historically different names have been applied to different parts of the spectrum, as though these were different types of radiation. Thus, although these "different kinds" of electromagnetic radiation form a quantitatively continuous spectrum of frequencies and wavelengths, the spectrum remains divided for practical reasons arising from these qualitative interaction differences.

## Radio waves
Radiowaves are emitted and received byantennas, which consist of conductors such as metal rodresonators. In artificial generation of radio waves, an electronic device called atransmittergenerates an alternatingelectric currentwhich is applied to an antenna. The oscillating electrons in the antenna generate oscillatingelectricandmagnetic fieldsthat radiate away from the antenna as radio waves. In reception of radio waves, the oscillating electric and magnetic fields of a radio wave couple to the electrons in an antenna, pushing them back and forth, creating oscillating currents which are applied to aradio receiver. Earth's atmosphere is mainly transparent to radio waves, except for layers of charged particles in theionospherewhich can reflect certain frequencies.
Radio waves are extremely widely used to transmit information across distances inradio communicationsystems such asradio broadcasting,television,two way radios,mobile phones,communication satellites, andwireless networking. In a radio communication system, a radio frequency current ismodulatedwith an information-bearingsignalin a transmitter by varying either the amplitude, frequency or phase, and applied to an antenna. The radio waves carry the information across space to a receiver, where they are received by an antenna and the information extracted bydemodulationin the receiver.  Radio waves are also used for navigation in systems likeGlobal Positioning System(GPS) andnavigational beacons, and locating distant objects inradiolocationandradar. They are also used forremote control, and for industrial heating.
The use of theradio spectrumis strictly regulated by governments, coordinated by theInternational Telecommunication Union(ITU) whichallocates frequenciesto different users for different uses.

## Microwaves
Microwavesare radio waves of shortwavelength, from about 10 centimeters to one millimeter, in theSHFandEHFfrequency bands. Microwave energy is produced withklystronandmagnetrontubes, and withsolid statedevices such asGunnandIMPATT diodes. Although they are emitted and absorbed by short antennas, they are also absorbed bypolar molecules, coupling to vibrational and rotational modes, resulting in bulk heating. Unlike higher frequency waves such asinfraredandvisible lightwhich are absorbed mainly at surfaces, microwaves can penetrate into materials and deposit their energy below the surface. This effect is used to heat food inmicrowave ovens, and for industrial heating and medicaldiathermy. Microwaves are the main wavelengths used inradar, and are used forsatellite communication, andwireless networkingtechnologies such asWi-Fi. The copper cables (transmission lines) which are used to carry lower-frequency radio waves to antennas have excessive power losses at microwave frequencies, and metal pipes calledwaveguidesare used to carry them. Although at the low end of the band the atmosphere is mainly transparent, at the upper end of the band absorption of microwaves by atmospheric gases limits practical propagation distances to a few kilometers.

## Terahertz radiation
Terahertz radiation, also known as sub-millimeter radiation, THF, T-rays, or T-light, is a region of the spectrum from about 100 GHz to 30 terahertz (THz) between microwaves and far infrared which can be regarded as belonging to either band. Until recently, the range was rarely studied and few sources existed for microwave energy in the so-calledterahertz gap, but applications such as imaging and communications are now appearing. Scientists are also looking to apply terahertz technology in the armed forces, where high-frequency waves might be directed at enemy troops to incapacitate their electronic equipment.[15]Terahertz radiation is strongly absorbed by atmospheric gases, making this frequency range useless for long-distance communication.

## Infrared radiation
Theinfraredpart of the electromagnetic spectrum covers the range from roughly 300 GHz to 400 THz (1 mm – 750 nm). It can be divided into three parts:[1]

## Visible light
Above infrared in frequency comesvisible light. TheSunemits its peak power in the visible region, although integrating the entire emission power spectrum through all wavelengths shows that the Sun emits slightly more infrared than visible light.[16]By definition, visible light is the part of the EM spectrum thehuman eyeis the most sensitive to. Visible light (and near-infrared light) is typically absorbed and emitted by electrons in molecules and atoms that move from one energy level to another. This action allows the chemical mechanisms that underlie human vision and plant photosynthesis. The light that excites the humanvisual systemis a very small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Arainbowshows the optical (visible) part of the electromagnetic spectrum; infrared (if it could be seen) would be located just beyond the red side of the rainbow whilstultravioletwould appear just beyond the opposite violet end.
Electromagnetic radiation with awavelengthbetween 380nmand 760 nm (400–790 terahertz) is detected by the human eye and perceived as visible light. Other wavelengths, especially near infrared (longer than 760 nm) and ultraviolet (shorter than 380 nm) are also sometimes referred to as light, especially when the visibility to humans is not relevant. White light is a combination of lights of different wavelengths in the visible spectrum. Passing white light through a prism splits it up into the several colours of light observed in the visible spectrum between 400 nm and 780 nm.
If radiation having a frequency in the visible region of the EM spectrum reflects off an object, say, a bowl of fruit, and then strikes the eyes, this results invisual perceptionof the scene. The brain's visual system processes the multitude of reflected frequencies into different shades and hues, and through this insufficiently understood psychophysical phenomenon, most people perceive a bowl of fruit.
At most wavelengths, however, the information carried by electromagnetic radiation is not directly detected by human senses. Natural sources produce EM radiation across the spectrum, and technology can also manipulate a broad range of wavelengths.Optical fibertransmits light that, although not necessarily in the visible part of the spectrum (it is usually infrared), can carry information. The modulation is similar to that used with radio waves.

## Ultraviolet radiation
Next in frequency comesultraviolet(UV). In frequency (and thus energy), UV rays sit between the violet end of thevisible spectrumand the X-ray range. The UV wavelength spectrum ranges from 399 nm to 10 nm and is divided into 3 sections: UVA, UVB, and UVC.
UV is the lowest energy range energetic enough toionizeatoms, separatingelectronsfrom them, and thus causingchemical reactions. UV, X-rays, and gamma rays are thus collectively calledionizing radiation; exposure to them can damage living tissue. UV can also cause substances to glow with visible light; this is calledfluorescence. UV fluorescence is used by forensics to detect any evidence like blood and urine, that is produced by a crime scene. Also UV fluorescence is used to detect counterfeit money and IDs, as they are laced with material that can glow under UV.
At the middle range of UV, UV rays cannot ionize but can break chemical bonds, making molecules unusually reactive.Sunburn, for example, is caused by the disruptive effects of middle range UV radiation onskincells, which is the main cause ofskin cancer. UV rays in the middle and shorter range can irreparably damage the complexDNAmolecules in the cells producingthymine dimersmaking it a very potentmutagen. Due to skin cancer caused by UV, the sunscreen industry was invented to combat UV damage. Short range wavelengths are called UVC. UVB and UVC lights such as germicidal lamps utilize the destructive nature of these wavelengths to sterilize and have other scientific applications.
The Sun emits UV radiation (about 10% of its total power), including extremely short wavelength UV that could potentially destroy most life on land (ocean water would provide some protection for life there). However, most of the Sun's damaging UV wavelengths are absorbed by the atmosphere before they reach the surface. The higher energy (shortest wavelength) ranges of UV (called "vacuum UV") are absorbed by nitrogen and, at longer wavelengths, by simple diatomicoxygenin the air. Most of the UV in the mid-range of energy is blocked by the ozone layer, which absorbs strongly in the important 200–315 nm range, the lower energy part of which is too long for ordinarydioxygenin air to absorb. This leaves less than 3% of sunlight at sea level in UV, with all of this remainder at the lower energies. The remainder is UV-A, along with some UV-B. The very lowest energy range of UV between 315 nm and visible light (called UV-A) is not blocked well by the atmosphere, but does not cause sunburn and does less biological damage. However, it is not harmless and does create oxygen radicals, mutations and skin damage.

## X-rays
After UV comeX-rays, which, like the upper ranges of UV are also ionizing. However, due to their higher energies, X-rays can also interact with matter by means of theCompton effect. Hard X-rays have shorter wavelengths than soft X-rays and as they can pass through many substances with little absorption, they can be used to 'see through' objects with 'thicknesses' less than that equivalent to a few meters of water. One notable use is diagnostic X-ray imaging in medicine (a process known asradiography). X-rays are useful as probes in high-energy physics. In astronomy, the accretion disks aroundneutron starsandblack holesemit X-rays, enabling studies of these phenomena. X-rays are also emitted bystellar coronaand are strongly emitted by some types ofnebulae. However,X-ray telescopesmust be placed outside the Earth's atmosphere to see astronomical X-rays, since the great depth of theatmosphere of Earthis opaque to X-rays (withareal densityof 1000 g/cm2), equivalent to 10 meters thickness of water.[17]This is an amount sufficient to block almost all astronomical X-rays (and also astronomical gamma rays—see below).

## Gamma rays
After hard X-rays comegamma rays, which were discovered byPaul Ulrich Villardin 1900. These are the most energeticphotons, having no defined lower limit to their wavelength. Inastronomythey are valuable for studying high-energy objects or regions, however as with X-rays this can only be done with telescopes outside the Earth's atmosphere. Gamma rays are used experimentally by physicists for their penetrating ability and are produced by a number ofradioisotopes. They are used forirradiationof foods and seeds for sterilization, and in medicine they are occasionally used inradiation cancer therapy.[18]More commonly, gamma rays are used for diagnostic imaging innuclear medicine, an example beingPET scans. The wavelength of gamma rays can be measured with high accuracy through the effects ofCompton scattering.