## Endangered species
Anendangered speciesis aspeciesthat is very likely to becomeextinctin the near future, either worldwide or in a particular region. Endangered species may be at risk due to factors such ashabitat loss,poaching,invasive species, andclimate change.[1]TheInternational Union for Conservation of Nature(IUCN)Red Listlists the globalconservation statusof many species, and various other agencies assess the status of species within particular areas. Many nations havelawsthat protectconservation-reliant specieswhich, for example, forbidhuntingorharvesting, restrictland development, or createprotected areas. Some endangered species are the target of extensive conservation efforts such ascaptive breedingandhabitat restoration.
Human activity is a significant factor in causing species to become endangered.[2][3][4][5]

## Conservation status
Theconservation statusof aspeciesindicates the likelihood that it will becomeextinct.  Multiple factors are considered when assessing the status of a species; e.g., such statistics as the number remaining, the overall increase or decrease in the population over time, breeding success rates, or known threats.[6]TheIUCN Red List of Threatened Speciesis the best-known worldwide conservation status listing and ranking system.[7]
IUCN Red List of Threatened Species
TheIUCN Red List of Threatened Speciesby theInternational Union for Conservation of Natureis the best known worldwide conservation status listing and ranking system. Species are classified by the IUCN Red List into nine groups set through criteria such as rate of decline, population size, area of geographicdistribution, and degree of population and distribution fragmentation.[8][9]
Also included are species that have gone extinct since 1500 CE.[10]When discussing the IUCN Red List, the official term "threatened" is a grouping of three categories: critically endangered, endangered, and vulnerable.
Over 50% of the world's species are estimated to be at risk of extinction,[11]but the frontiers between categories such as "endangered", "rare", or "locally extinct" species are often difficult to draw given the general paucity of data on most of these species. This is notably the case in the world's oceans, where distances are vast and endangered species not seen for decades may go extinct unnoticed.
Internationally, 195 countries have signed an accord to createBiodiversity Action Plansthat will protect endangered and other threatened species. In the United States, such plans are usually calledSpecies Recovery Plans.[citation needed]

## IUCN Red List
Though labeled a list, theIUCN Red Listis a system of assessing the global conservation status of species that includes "Data Deficient" (DD) species – species for which more data and assessment is required before their situation may be determined – as well species comprehensively assessed by the IUCN's species assessment process.[12]The species under the index include: mammals, birds, amphibians, cycads, and corals. Those species of "Near Threatened" (NT) and "Least Concern" (LC) status have been assessed and found to have relatively robust and healthy populations, though these may be in decline. Unlike their more general use elsewhere, the List uses the terms "endangered species" and "threatened species" with particular meanings: "Endangered" (EN) species lie between "Vulnerable" (VU) and "Critically Endangered" (CR) species. In 2012, the IUCN Red List listed 3,079 animal and 2,655 plant species as endangered (EN) worldwide.[12]

## In Brazil
Brazilis one of the mostbiodiversecountries in the world, if not the most. It houses not only the Amazon forest but theAtlantic forest, the savanna-likeCerradoamong otherbiomes.[15]Due to the high density of some of its well-preserved rainforests,wildlife trafficking, which along with deforestation is one of the biggest endangerment drivers in Brazil, has become a challenge. Brazil has a broad legal system meant to protect the environment, including itsConstitution,[16]as well as several federal, state and local government agencies tasked with protecting thefaunaandflora, fining individuals or companies linked toenvironmental crimesand confiscating illegally taken wildlife. Though such agencies can collect their data, each system operates relatively on its own when it comes to wildlife trafficking. However, both the agencies and theNGO's working in Brazil agree that the birds account for about 80% of trafficked species in the country.[17]
The relation between wildlife smuggling, other environment crimes under the Brazilian law such asdeforestation, and endangered species is particularly intricate and troubling since the rarer the animal or plant gets the most targeted and valuable they become in theblack market, which leads to more endangered species in its turn.[18]
Additionally, some environment experts and scientists point to the disbanding of environment agencies and the repeal of laws in Brazil under thepresidency of Jair Bolsonaroas one of the reasons behind a surge in the number of endangered species.[19]In one occasion during his presidency some fines totaling US$6.7 billion on environment criminals were revoked and at least one fine (related toillegal fishing) imposed on Bolsonaro himself was cancelled and the agent who fined him wasdemoted.[20]
In the past, Brazil has successfully saved the endemicgolden lion tamarinfromextinction. Massive campaigns to raise awareness among people by NGO's and governments, which included printing depictions of the golden lion tamarin in the20 reais Brazilian banknotes(still in circulation), are credited with getting the species out of thecritically endangeredanimals list.[21][22]

## In the United States
There is data from theUnited Statesthat shows a correlation between human populations and threatened and endangered species. Using species data from the Database on the Economics and Management of Endangered Species database and the period that theEndangered Species Act(ESA) has been in existence, 1970 to 1997, a table was created that suggests a positive relationship between human activity and species endangerment.[23]

## Effect of climate change on endangered species
Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphereis asserted to be one of the leading causes of animal endangerment. According to the USNational Park Service:[24]
If we can sufficiently reduce greenhouse gas emissions, many of them will still have a chance to survive and recover.NASAscientistJames Hansonhas warned that in order to maintain a climate similar to that under which human civilization developed and similar to that which so many organisms are adapted, we need to quickly reduce the carbon dioxide in our atmosphere to 350parts per million(ppm). Before the industrial revolution, atmospheric carbon dioxide levels rarely rose above 280 ppm; during the 2014 calendar year, carbon dioxide levels fluctuated between 395 and 402 ppm.

## Endangered Species Act
Under theEndangered Species Act of 1973in the United States, species may be listed as "endangered" or "threatened". The Salt Creek tiger beetle is an example of an endangered subspecies protected under the ESA. TheUS Fish and Wildlife Service, as well as theNational Marine Fisheries Serviceare held responsible for classifying and protecting endangered species. They are also responsible for adding a particular species to the list, which can be a long, controversial process.[25]The act adds numerous other provisions as well, including the designation of endangered species' critical habitats and a requirement to develop a recovery plan for the species. On top of this, the ESA protects endangered species from government policies; for instance, federal agencies must consult the Fish and Wildlife Service or the National Marine Fisheries Service before executing any action that may jeopardize threatened species or their habitats.[26]
Some endangered species laws are controversial. Typical areas of controversy include criteria for placing a species on the endangered species list and rules for removing a species from the list once its population has recovered. Whether restrictions on land development constitute a "taking" of land by the government; the related question of whether private landowners should be compensated for the loss of uses of their areas; and obtaining reasonable exceptions to protection laws. Also lobbying fromhuntersand various industries like thepetroleum industry,constructionindustry, andlogging, has been an obstacle in establishing endangered species laws.[citation needed]
TheBush administrationlifted a policy that required federal officials to consult a wildlife expert before taking actions that could damage endangered species. Under theObama administration, this policy was reinstated.[27]
Being listed as an endangered species can have an indirect negative effect since the perceived increase in rarity could make a species more desirable for collectors and poachers.[28]This effect is potentially reducible, such as in China where commercially farmed turtles may be reducing some of the pressure to poach endangered species.[29]
Another problem with the listing of species is its effect of inciting the use of the "shoot, shovel, and shut-up" method of clearing endangered species from an area of land. Some landowners currently may perceive a diminution in value for their land after finding an endangered animal on it. They have allegedly opted to kill and bury the animals or destroy habitat silently. Thus removing the problem from their land, but at the same time further reducing the population of an endangered species.[30]The effectiveness of the ESA– which coined the term "endangered species"– has been questioned by business advocacy groups and their publications but is nevertheless widely recognized by wildlife scientists who work with the species as an effective recovery tool. Nineteen species have been delisted and recovered[31]and 93% of listed species in the north eastern United States have a recovering or stable population.[32]
Currently, 1,556 endangered species are under protection by government law. This approximation, however, does not take into consideration the species threatened with endangerment that are not included under the protection of laws like the Endangered Species Act. According toNatureServe's global conservation status, approximately thirteen percent of vertebrates (excluding marine fish), seventeen percent of vascular plants, and six to eighteen percent of fungi are considered imperiled.[33]: 415Thus, in total, between seven and eighteen percent of the United States' known animals, fungi and plants are near extinction.[33]: 416This total is substantially more than the number of species protected in the United States under the Endangered Species Act.
Ever since humankind began hunting to preserve itself, over-hunting and fishing have been a large and dangerous problem. Of all the species who became extinct due to interference from humankind, thedodo,passenger pigeon,great auk,Tasmanian tigerandSteller's sea coware some of the more well known examples; with thebald eagle,grizzly bear,American bison,Eastern timber wolf,West African black rhinoceros,ivory belled woodpeckerandsea turtlehaving been poached to near-extinction.  Many began as food sources seen as necessary for survival but became the target of sport. However, due to major efforts to prevent extinction, the bald eagle, orHaliaeetus leucocephalusis now under the category of Least Concern on the red list.[34]
A present-day example of the over-hunting of a species can be seen in the oceans as populations of certain whales have been greatly reduced. Large whales like theblue whale,bowhead whale,finback whale,gray whale,sperm whale, andhumpback whaleare some of the eight whales which are currently still included on the Endangered Species List. Actions have been taken to attempt a reduction in whaling and increase population sizes.  The actions include prohibiting all whaling in United States waters, the formation of the CITES treaty which protects all whales, along with the formation of theInternational Whaling Commission(IWC).  But even though all of these movements have been put in place, countries such asJapancontinue to hunt and harvest whales under the claim of "scientific purposes".[35]Over-hunting, climatic change and habitat loss leads in landing species in endangered species list. It could mean that extinction rates could increase to a large extent in the future.

## In Canada
Endangered species are addressed through Canada'sSpecies at Risk Act. A species is deemed threatened or endangered when it is on the verge of extinction orextirpation. Once a species is deemed threatened or endangered, the Act requires that a recovery plan to be developed that indicates how to stop or reverse the species' population decline.[36]As of 2024, there are 339 Canadian species classified as endangered by the IUCN Red List.[37]

## In India
The World Wide Fund-India raises concern in the longevity of the following animal species: theRed Panda, theBengal Tiger, theGanges River Dolphin, theAsian Elephant.[38]
India has had significantly high rates of poaching and animal trafficking, threatening many animal species there. Since 1987, over half of trafficked tiger seizures have been within India. The government signed theWildlife Protection Actand also joined the Convention on the International Trade in 1976, to prevent poaching from harming its wildlife.[39]

## Introduced species
The introduction of non-indigenous species to an area can disrupt the ecosystem to such an extent that native species become endangered. Such introductions may be termedintroducedorinvasive species. In some cases, the invasive species compete with the native species for food or prey on the natives. In other cases, a stable ecological balance may be upset by predation or other causes leading to unexpected species decline. New species may also carry diseases to which the native species have no exposure or resistance. The continent of Oceania is under much more pressure, as the invasive birds and mammals there have no natural predators.[40]Notably, the threat posed by introduces species may be greater than anticipated due to the threats on endangered species that have not yet had a significant effect, but likely will in the future.[41]

## Climate change
The World Wildlife Fund(WWF) emphasizes that our planet is warming at a rate faster than any time in the past 10,000 years, necessitating species to adapt to new climate patterns, such as variations in rainfall and longer, warmer summers.[42]For example, theU.S. Fish & Wildlife Servicehighlighted efforts to understand and mitigate the impact of climate change on species through scientific research, modeling, and conservation actions. This includes evaluating the current condition of species, their genetic variation, and how changes in their environment may affect their survival.[43]
TheInternational Union for Conservation of Nature(IUCN) reports that the approximately 1 °C rise in mean global temperature due to human activities is causing serious impacts on species, including changes in abundance, genetic composition, behavior, and survival. The IUCN stresses the importance of environmental policies aimed at reducingCO2emissions to lessen the impact of climate change on species. Tools like the IUCN Red List and guidelines for assessing species' vulnerability to climate change are vital for conservation efforts.[44]
In addition, climate change can lead to species decreasing in areas where they once thrived, by being forced to migrate or even going extinct from inhospitable conditions, invasive species, and fragmentation. A study cited by WWF found that one in six species is at risk of extinction due to climate change if no action is taken. The phenomenon of species shifting their ranges in response to changing climates, finding new or shrinking habitats, illustrates the direct impact of global warming on biodiversity.[42]Another major concern is rising ocean acidity caused from excessCO2in the atmosphere. This creates acidic conditions in the ocean which creates an inhospitable environment for fish, plants, and other keystone species such as coral reefs[45]
For example, theEmperor Penguins, which rely on Antarctic sea ice for breeding, shelter, and food, are directly threatened by the melting of ice sheets. Similarly, the Mount Rainierwhite-tailed ptarmigan, adapted to alpine mountaintops, faces habitat loss due to climate changes in snowfall patterns and rising temperatures.[46]
Another example is in the case of the Salton Sea in California. This area is a critical habitat for many endangered and watched species, as well as many migratory birds. Due to environmental shifts from climate change and the addition of agriculture in the surrounding plains, the system has become almost irreparably damaged. The warming temperatures has caused mass evaporation, leaving the Sea much more saline and with much more exposed playa. This not only damages air quality but also has caused fish kills to accumulate as shown pictured below. This has made the system inhospitable to the birds and endangered species relying upon it[47]

## Captive breeding
Captive breeding is the process of breeding rare or endangered species in human controlled environments with restricted settings, such as wildlife reserves, zoos, and other conservation facilities. Captive breeding is meant to save species from extinction and so stabilise the population of the species that it will not disappear.[48]
This technique has worked for many species for some time, with probably the oldest known such instances of captive mating being attributed to menageries of European and Asian rulers, an example being thePère David's deer. However, captive breeding techniques are usually difficult to implement for such highly mobile species as some migratory birds (e.g. cranes) and fishes (e.g.hilsa). Additionally, if the captive breeding population is too small, then inbreeding may occur due to a reducedgene pooland reduceresistance.
In 1981, theAssociation of Zoos and Aquariums(AZA) created aSpecies Survival Plan(SSP) to help preserve specific endangered and threatened species through captive breeding.  With over 450 SSP Plans, some endangered species are covered by the AZA with plans to cover population management goals and recommendations for breeding for a diverse and healthy population, created by Taxon Advisory Groups. These programs are commonly created as a last resort effort. SSP Programs regularly participate in species recovery, veterinary care for wildlife disease outbreaks, and some other wildlife conservation efforts. The AZA's Species Survival Plan also has breeding and transfer programs, both within and outside of AZA – certified zoos and aquariums. Some animals that are part of SSP programs aregiant pandas, lowland gorillas, andCalifornia condors.[49]

## Private farming
Whereas poaching substantially reduces endangered animal populations, legal, for-profit, private farming does the opposite. It has substantially increased the populations of the southernblack rhinocerosand southernwhite rhinoceros. Richard Emslie, a scientific officer at the IUCN, said of such programs, "Effective law enforcement has become much easier now that the animals are largely privately owned... We have been able to bring local communities into conservation programs. There are increasingly strong economic incentives attached to looking after rhinos rather than simply poaching: from Eco-tourism or selling them on for a profit. So many owners are keeping them secure. The private sector has been key to helping our work."[50]
Conservation experts view the effect of China'sturtle farmingon the wild turtle populations of China andSouth-Eastern Asia– many of which are endangered– as "poorly understood".[51]Although they commend the gradual replacement of turtles caught wild withfarm-raised turtlesin the marketplace– the percentage of farm-raised individuals in the "visible" trade grew from around 30% in 2000 to around 70% in 2007[52]– they worry that many wild animals are caught to provide farmers with breeding stock. The conservation expert Peter Paul van Dijk noted that turtle farmers often believe that animals caught wild are superior breeding stock. Turtle farmers may, therefore, seek and catch the last remaining wild specimens of some endangered turtle species.[52]
In 2015, researchers in Australia managed to coaxsouthern bluefin tunato breed in landlocked tanks, raising the possibility thatfish farmingmay be able to save the species fromoverfishing.[53]

## Conservation baselines and proposed paradigm shifts
Some scientists have proposed that redefining the baseline for assessing recovery of an endangered species may be necessary as a last resort in the face of extinction, as the increased flexibility provides more realistic recovery goals in the face of extinction.[54][55][56]This strategy, however, needs to be pursued with significant care and is typically not considered before attempting recovery within the natural range when possible, due to carrying additional risks and potential unintended consequences.[54][55]These changes can come in many forms, including relocating a species to a new and better suited habitat, allowing the species to breed with other similar species, or accepting that the modern stable population may be less than it was in the past. An example of these strategies being put into action is through the Florida panther. To save the species, cougars from Texas were introduced, turning a large subset of the panther population into panther–cougar hybrids that were well suited to the environment, facilitating the recovery of the population.[54]

## Hawaiian monk seal
Hawaiian monk sealsare one of the most endangered seal species in the world. Conservation initiatives have focused on mitigating human-seal conflicts, rehabilitating injured seals, and extensive monitoring to ensure their survival. These efforts have led to a gradual increase in their population.[57]

## American bald eagle
Once on the brink of extinction in the contiguous United States with only 417 known nesting pairs in 1963 due to pesticide use and habitat destruction, thebald eaglepopulation has made a remarkable recovery. By 2020, the number of nesting pairs had surged to 71,400. Major strategies employed to help raise populations included the provision of eaglets from stable regions to more threatened regions, and major land purchases to act as sanctuaries for the eagles. Thanks to habitat protection, legal protection, and DDT ban efforts, the bald eagle was removed from the list of threatened and endangered species.[58][59][60]

## Gray wolf
Starting in 1995 and 1996, 31gray wolvesfromwestern Canadawere relocated toYellowstone, where they were temporarily kept in acclimation pens before being released into the wild. This careful reintroduction aimed to restore a key predator to the ecosystem, which had profound effects on the park's wildlife dynamics. After being nearly eradicated in the lower 48 states by the early 20th century, reintroduction and protective measures have allowed their populations to rebound significantly. By 2017, gray wolves were delisted inMontana,Idaho, andWyoming, indicating a recovery to a point where they were no longer considered endangered in these areas.[61][62]

## Channel Island fox
Beginning in 1999, theChannel Islands National Parklaunched an ambitious recovery program for theisland fox, incorporating several strategies: captive breeding and reintroduction, removal of predatory golden eagles, re-establishment of bald eagles, and eradication of non-native ungulates. TheU.S. Department of the Interiorofficially recognized the recovery as the fastest for any Endangered Species Act-listed mammal in the U.S., announcing the delisting of three island fox subspecies in 2016. This recovery, from near extinction in the late 1990s to robust populations by the mid-2010s, underscores the power of partnership-driven conservation.[63][64]

## Purple Emperor butterfly
ThePurple Emperor, native to the UK, has seen a significant comeback in recent years, expanding from southern England to a large portion of the British Isles. Conservation groups have aided this process through the planting ofgoat willowsin many forests, an important food source for the butterfly larvae. The territorial nature of the species makes this process more complicated, requiring many willow trees be planted over a large area, but groups such as Butterfly Conservation have made the recovery process possible.[65]