## Endangered language
Anendangered languageormoribund languageis alanguagethat is at risk of disappearing as its speakers die out or shift to speaking other languages.[1]Language loss occurs when the language has no more native speakers and becomes a "dead" or "extinct language". A dead language may still be studied through recordings or writings, but it is still considered dead or extinct once there are no morefluentspeakers left.[2]Although languages have always become extinct throughout human history, endangered languages are currently dying at an accelerated rate because ofglobalization,mass migration,imperialism,neocolonialism[3]andlinguicide(language killing).[4][better source needed]
Language shiftmost commonly occurs when speakers switch to a languageassociated with social or economic poweror one spoken more widely, leading to the gradual decline and eventual death of the endangered language. The process of language shift is often influenced by factors such as globalisation, economic authorities, and the perceived prestige of certain languages. The ultimate result is the loss of linguistic diversity and cultural heritage within affected communities. The general consensus is that between 6,000[5]and 7,000 languages are currently spoken. Some linguists estimate that between 50% and 90% of them will be severely endangered or dead by the year 2100.[3]The20 most common languages, each with more than 50 million speakers, are spoken by 50% of the world's population, but most languages are spoken by fewer than 10,000 people.[3]
The first step towards language death ispotential endangerment. This is when a language faces strong external pressure, but there are still communities of speakers who pass the language to their children. The second stage isendangerment. Once a language has reached the endangerment stage, there are only a few speakers left and children are, for the most part, not learning the language. The third stage of language extinction isseriously endangered. During this stage, a language is unlikely to survive another generation and will soon be extinct. The fourth stage ismoribund, followed by the fifth stageextinction.
Many projects are under way aimed at preventing or slowing language loss byrevitalizingendangered languages and promoting education and literacy in minority languages, often involving joint projects between language communities and linguists.[6]Across the world, many countries have enactedspecific legislationaimed at protecting and stabilizing the language of indigenousspeech communities. Recognizing that most of the world's endangered languages are unlikely to be revitalized, many linguists are also working ondocumentingthe thousands of languages of the world about which little or nothing is known.
Some widely spoken languages have endangered regionaldialects, such as the varieties ofEnglishspoken on the American east coast, such asEastern New England English.

## Number of languages
The total number of contemporary languages in the world is not known, and it is not well defined what constitutes a separate language as opposed to a dialect. Estimates vary depending on the extent and means of the research undertaken, and the definition of a distinct language and the current state of knowledge of remote and isolated language communities. The number of known languages varies over time as some of them become extinct and others are newly discovered. An accurate number of languages in the world was not yet known until the use of universal,systematic surveysin the later half of the twentieth century.[7]The majority of linguists in the early twentieth century refrained from making estimates. Before then, estimates were frequently the product of guesswork and very low.[8]
One of the most active research agencies isSIL International, which maintains a database,Ethnologue, kept up to date by the contributions of linguists globally.[9]
Ethnologue's 2005[needs update]count of languages in its database, excluding duplicates in different countries, was 6,912, of which 32.8% (2,269) were in Asia, and 30.3% (2,092) in Africa.[10]This contemporary tally must be regarded as a variable number within a range. Areas with a particularly large number of languages that are nearing extinction include:Eastern Siberia,Central Siberia,Northern Australia,Central America, and theNorthwest Pacific Plateau. Other hotspots areOklahomaand theSouthern Coneof South America.[11]

## Endangered sign languages
Almost all of the study of language endangerment has been with spoken languages. A UNESCO study of endangered languages does not mention sign languages.[12]However, somesign languagesare also endangered, such asAlipur Village Sign Language(AVSL) of India,[13]Adamorobe Sign Languageof Ghana,Ban Khor Sign Languageof Thailand, andPlains Indian Sign Language.[14][15]Many sign languages are used by small communities; small changes in their environment (such as contact with a larger sign language or dispersal of the deaf community) can lead to the endangerment and loss of their traditional sign language. Methods are being developed to assess the vitality of sign languages.[16]

## Defining and measuring endangerment
While there is no definite threshold for identifying a language as endangered,UNESCO's 2003 document entitledLanguage vitality and endangerment[17]outlines nine factors for determining language vitality:
Many languages, for example some inIndonesia, have tens of thousands of speakers, but are endangered because children are no longer learning them, and speakers are shifting to using thenational language(e.g.Indonesian) in place of local languages. In contrast, a language with only 500 speakers might be considered very much alive if it is the primary language of a community, and is the first (or only) spoken language of all children in that community.[citation needed]
Asserting that "Language diversity is essential to the human heritage", UNESCO's Ad Hoc Expert Group on Endangered Languages offers this definition of an endangered language: "... when its speakers cease to use it, use it in an increasingly reduced number of communicative domains, and cease to pass it on from one generation to the next. That is, there are no new speakers, adults or children."[17]
UNESCO operates with four levels of language endangerment between "safe" (not endangered) and "extinct" (no living speakers), based on intergenerational transfer: "vulnerable" (not spoken by children outside the home), "definitely endangered" (children no longer learning the language), "severely endangered" (only spoken by older generations), and "critically endangered" (youngest speakers are grandparents and older, oftensemi-speakers). UNESCO'sAtlas of the World's Languages in Dangercategorises 2,473 languages by level of endangerment.[5]
As of November 2025, these categories are currently being reviewed by UNESCO to ensure they reflect the most up-to-date information on language vitality worldwide. Updates aim to provide an accurate and reliable representation of the current status of languages, supporting efforts in documentation, preservation, and revitalization.
Using an alternative scheme of classification, linguistMichael E. Kraussdefines languages as "safe" if it is considered that children will probably be speaking them in 100 years; "endangered" if children will probably not be speaking them in 100 years (approximately 60–80% of languages fall into this category) and "moribund" if children are not speaking them now.[18]
Many scholars have devised techniques for determining whether languages are endangered. One of the earliest is GIDS (Graded Intergenerational Disruption Scale) proposed byJoshua Fishmanin 1991.[19]In 2011 an entire issue ofJournal of Multilingual and Multicultural Developmentwas devoted to the study of ethnolinguistic vitality, Vol. 32.2, 2011, with several authors presenting their own tools for measuring language vitality. A number of other published works on measuring language vitality have been published, prepared by authors with varying situations and applications in mind.[20][21][22][23][24][25]

## Causes
According to theCambridge Handbook of Endangered Languages,[3]there are four main types of causes of language endangerment:
Causes that put the populations that speak the languages in physical danger, such as:
Causes that prevent or discourage speakers from using a language, such as:
Often multiple of these causes act at the same time. Poverty, disease and disasters often affect minority groups disproportionately, for example causing the dispersal of speaker populations and decreased survival rates for those who stay behind.

## Marginalization and endangerment
Among the causes of language endangerment cultural, political and economicmarginalizationaccounts for most of the world's language endangerment. Scholars distinguish between several types of marginalization: Economic dominance negatively affects minority languages when poverty leads people to migrate towards the cities or to other countries, thus dispersing the speakers. Cultural dominance occurs when literature and higher education is only accessible in the majority language. Political dominance occurs when education and political activity is carried out exclusively in a majority language.
Historically, in colonies, and elsewhere where speakers of different languages have come into contact, some languages have been considered superior to others: often one language has attained a dominant position in a country. Speakers of endangered languages may themselves come to associate their language with negative values such as poverty, illiteracy and social stigma, causing them to wish to adopt the dominant language that is associated with social and economical progress andmodernity.[3]Immigrants moving into an area may lead to the endangerment of the autochthonous language.[32]
Dialects and accents have seen similar levels of endangerment during the 21st century due to similar reasons.[33][34][35][36]

## Effects
Language endangerment affects both the languages themselves and the people that speak them. This also affects the essence of a culture.

## Effects on communities
As communities lose their language, they often lose parts of their cultural traditions that are tied to that language. Examples include songs, myths, poetry, local remedies, ecological and geological knowledge, as well as language behaviors that are not easily translated.[37]Furthermore, the social structure of one's community is often reflected through speech and language behavior. This pattern is even more prominent in dialects. This may in turn affect the sense of identity of the individual and the community as a whole, producing a weakened social cohesion as their values and traditions are replaced with new ones. This is sometimes characterized asanomie. Losing a language may also have political consequences as some countries confer different political statuses or privileges on minority ethnic groups, often defining ethnicity in terms of language. In turn, communities that lose their language may also lose political legitimacy as a community with specialcollective rights.[citation needed]Language can also be considered as scientific knowledge in topics such as medicine, philosophy, botany, and more. It reflects a community's practices when dealing with the environment and each other. When a language is lost, this knowledge is often lost as well.[38]
In contrast, language revitalization is correlated with better health outcomes in indigenous communities.[39]

## Effects on languages
During language loss—sometimes referred to asobsolescencein the linguistic literature—the language that is being lost generally undergoes changes as speakers make their language more similar to the language that they are shifting to. For example, gradually losing grammatical or phonological complexities that are not found in the dominant language.[40][41]

## Ethical considerations and attitudes
Generally the accelerated pace of language endangerment is considered to be a problem by linguists and by the speakers. However, some linguists, such as the phoneticianPeter Ladefoged, have argued that language death is a natural part of the process of human cultural development, and that languages die because communities stop speaking them for their own reasons. Ladefoged argued that linguists should simply document and describe languages scientifically, but not seek to interfere with the processes of language loss.[42]A similar view has been argued at length by linguistSalikoko Mufwene, who sees the cycles of language death and emergence of new languages throughcreolizationas a continuous ongoing process.[43][44][45]
A majority of linguists do consider that language loss is an ethical problem, as they consider that most communities would prefer to maintain their languages if given a real choice. They also consider it a scientific problem, because language loss on the scale currently taking place will mean that future linguists will only have access to a fraction of the world's linguistic diversity, therefore their picture of what human language is—and can be—will be limited.[46][47][48][49][50]
Some linguists consider linguistic diversity to be analogous to biological diversity, and compare language endangerment towildlife endangerment.[51]

## Response
Linguists, members of endangered language communities, governments, nongovernmental organizations, and international organizations such as UNESCO and the European Union are actively working to save and stabilize endangered languages.[3]Once a language is determined to be endangered, there are three steps that can be taken in order to stabilize or rescue the language. The first is language documentation, the second is language revitalization and the third is language maintenance.[3]
Language documentationis the documentation in writing and audio-visual recording ofgrammar, vocabulary, and oral traditions (e.g. stories, songs, religious texts) of endangered languages. It entails producing descriptive grammars, collections of texts and dictionaries of the languages, and it requires the establishment of a secure archive where the material can be stored once it is produced so that it can be accessed by future generations of speakers or scientists.[3]
Language revitalizationis the process by which a language community through political, community, and educational means attempts to increase the number of active speakers of the endangered language.[3]This process is also sometimes referred to aslanguage revival or reversing language shift.[3]For case studies of this process, see Anderson (2014).[52]Applied linguistics and education are helpful in revitalizing endangered languages.[53]Vocabulary and courses are available online for a number of endangered languages.[54]
Language maintenance refers to the support given to languages that need for their survival to be protected from outsiders who can ultimately affect the number of speakers of a language.[3]UNESCO seeks to prevent language extinction by promoting and supporting the language in education, culture, communication and information, and science.[55]
Another option is "post-vernacular maintenance": the teaching of some words and concepts of the lost language, rather than revival proper.[56]
As of June 2012[needs update]the United States has aJ-1 specialist visa, which allows indigenous language experts who do not have academic training to enter the U.S. as experts aiming to share their knowledge and expand their skills.[57]