## Epidemiology
Epidemiologyis the study and analysis of the distribution (who, when, and where), patterns anddeterminantsof health and disease conditions in a definedpopulation, and application of this knowledge to prevent diseases.
It is a cornerstone ofpublic health, and shapes policy decisions andevidence-based practiceby identifyingrisk factorsfor disease and targets forpreventive healthcare. Epidemiologists help with study design, collection, andstatistical analysisof data, amend interpretation and dissemination of results (includingpeer reviewand occasionalsystematic review). Epidemiology has helped developmethodologyused inclinical research,public healthstudies, and, to a lesser extent,basic researchin the biological sciences.[1]
Major areas of epidemiological study include disease causation,transmission,outbreakinvestigation,disease surveillance,environmental epidemiology,forensic epidemiology,occupational epidemiology,screening,biomonitoring, and comparisons of treatment effects such as inclinical trials. Epidemiologists rely on other scientific disciplines likebiologyto better understand disease processes,statisticsto make efficient use of the data and draw appropriate conclusions,social sciencesto better understand proximate and distal causes, andengineeringforexposure assessment.
Epidemiology, literally meaning 'the study of what is upon the people', is derived from fromGreekepi'upon, among';demos'people'andlogos'study', referring to the study of humanpopulations. However, the term is widely used in studies ofzoologicalpopulations (veterinary epidemiology), although the term 'epizootiology' was historically used.[2]'Epidemiology' has also been applied to studies of plant populations (botanical orplant disease epidemiology).[3]
The distinction between "epidemic" and "endemic" was first drawn byHippocrates,[4]The term "epidemiology" appears to have first been used to describe the study of epidemics in 1802 by the Spanish physicianJoaquín de Villalba[es]inEpidemiología Española. Epidemiologists also study the interaction of diseases in a population, a condition known as asyndemic.
The term epidemiology is now widely applied to cover the description and causation of not only epidemic,infectious disease, but of disease in general, including related conditions and, especially since the 20th century,chronic diseasessuch as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. Some examples of topics examined through epidemiology include high blood pressure, mental illness andobesity. Therefore, this epidemiology is based upon how the pattern of the disease causes change in the function of human beings.

## History
The Greek physicianHippocrates, taught by Democritus, was known as the father ofmedicine,[5][6]sought a logic to sickness; he is the first person known to have examined the relationships between the occurrence of disease and environmental influences.[7]Hippocrates believed sickness of the human body to be caused by an imbalance of the fourhumors(black bile, yellow bile, blood, and phlegm). The cure to the sickness was to remove or add the humor in question to balance the body. This belief led to the application of bloodletting and dieting in medicine.[8]He coined the termsendemic(for diseases usually found in some places but not in others) andepidemic(for diseases that are seen at some times but not others).[9]

## Modern era
In the middle of the 16th century, a doctor fromVeronanamedGirolamo Fracastorowas the first to propose a theory that the very small, unseeable, particles that cause disease were alive. They were considered to be able to spread by air, multiply by themselves and to be destroyable by fire. In this way he refutedGalen'smiasma theory(poison gas in sick people). In 1543 he wrote a bookDe contagione et contagiosis morbis, in which he was the first to promote personal and environmentalhygieneto prevent disease. The development of a sufficiently powerful microscope byAntonie van Leeuwenhoekin 1675 provided visual evidence of living particles consistent with agerm theory of disease.[10]
During theMing dynasty,Wu Youke(1582–1652) developed the idea that some diseases were caused by transmissible agents, which he calledLi Qi(戾气 or pestilential factors) when he observed various epidemics rage around him between 1641 and 1644.[11]His bookWen Yi Lun(瘟疫论, Treatise on Pestilence/Treatise of Epidemic Diseases) can be regarded as the main etiological work that brought forward the concept.[12]His concepts were still being considered in analysing SARS outbreak by WHO in 2004 in the context of traditional Chinese medicine.[13]
Another pioneer,Thomas Sydenham(1624–1689), was the first to distinguish the fevers of Londoners in the later 1600s. His theories on cures of fevers met with much resistance from traditional physicians at the time. He was not able to find the initial cause of thesmallpoxfever he researched and treated.[8]
John Graunt, ahaberdasherand amateur statistician, publishedNatural and Political Observations ... upon the Bills of Mortalityin 1662. In it, he analysed the mortality rolls inLondonbefore theGreat Plague, presented one of the firstlife tables, and reported time trends for many diseases, new and old. He provided statistical evidence for many theories on disease, and also refuted some widespread ideas on them.[14]
John Snowis famous for his investigations into the causes of the 19th-centurycholeraepidemics, and is also known as the father of (modern) Epidemiology.[15][16]He began with noticing the significantly higher death rates in two areas supplied by Southwark Company. His identification of theBroad Streetpump as the cause of the Soho epidemic is considered the classic example of epidemiology. Snow used chlorine in an attempt to clean the water and removed the handle; this ended the outbreak. This has been perceived as a major event in the history ofpublic healthand regarded as the founding event of the science of epidemiology, having helped shape public health policies around the world.[17][18]However, Snow's research and preventive measures to avoid further outbreaks were not fully accepted or put into practice until after his death due to the prevailingMiasma Theoryof the time, a model of disease in which poor air quality was blamed for illness. This was used to rationalize high rates of infection in impoverished areas instead of addressing the underlying issues of poor nutrition and sanitation, and was proven false by his work.[19]
Other pioneers include Danish physicianPeter Anton Schleisner, who in 1849 related his work on the prevention of the epidemic ofneonatal tetanuson theVestmanna IslandsinIceland.[20]Another important pioneer wasHungarianphysicianIgnaz Semmelweis, who in 1847 brought down infant mortality at a Vienna hospital by instituting a disinfection procedure. His findings were published in 1850, but his work was ill-received by his colleagues, who discontinued the procedure. Disinfection did not become widely practiced until British surgeonJoseph Lister, aided by his college, chemistThomas Anderson, was able to "discover"antisepticsin 1865 based on the earlier work ofLouis Pasteur.[21]
In the early 20th century, mathematical methods were introduced into epidemiology byRonald Ross,Janet Lane-Claypon,Anderson Gray McKendrick, and others.[22][23][24][25]In 1927,William Ogilvy KermackandAnderson Gray McKendrickpublished the foundationalSIR (Susceptible-Infected-Recovered) model, applyingmass-action kineticsfromchemistrytodisease transmissionin populations.[26]In a parallel development during the 1920s, German-Swiss pathologistMax Askanazyand others founded the International Society for Geographical Pathology to systematically investigate the geographical pathology of cancer and other non-infectious diseases across populations in different regions. After World War II,Richard Dolland other non-pathologists joined the field and advanced methods to study cancer, a disease with patterns and mode of occurrences that could not be suitably studied with the methods developed for epidemics of infectious diseases. Geography pathology eventually combined with infectious disease epidemiology to make the field that is epidemiology today.[27]
Another breakthrough was the 1954 publication of the results of aBritish Doctors Study, led byRichard DollandAustin Bradford Hill, which lent very strong statistical support to the link betweentobacco smokingandlung cancer.[citation needed]
In the late 20th century, with the advancement of biomedical sciences, a number of molecular markers in blood, other biospecimens and environment were identified as predictors of development or risk of a certain disease. Epidemiology research to examine the relationship between thesebiomarkersanalyzed at the molecular level and disease was broadly named "molecular epidemiology". Specifically, "genetic epidemiology" has been used for epidemiology of germline genetic variation and disease. Genetic variation is typically determined using DNA from peripheral blood leukocytes.[citation needed]

## 21st century
Since the 2000s,genome-wide association studies(GWAS) have been commonly performed to identify genetic risk factors for many diseases and health conditions.[28]
While most molecular epidemiology studies are still using conventional diseasediagnosisand classification systems, it is increasingly recognized that disease progression represents inherently heterogeneous processes differing from person to person. Conceptually, each individual has a unique disease process different from any other individual ("the unique disease principle"),[29][30]considering uniqueness of theexposome(a totality of endogenous and exogenous / environmental exposures) and its unique influence on molecular pathologic process in each individual. Studies to examine the relationship between an exposure and molecular pathologic signature of disease (particularlycancer) became increasingly common throughout the 2000s. However, the use ofmolecular pathologyin epidemiology posed unique challenges, including lack of research guidelines and standardizedstatisticalmethodologies, and paucity of interdisciplinary experts and training programs.[31]Furthermore, the concept of disease heterogeneity appears to conflict with the long-standing premise in epidemiology that individuals with the same disease name have similar etiologies and disease processes. To resolve these issues and advance population health science in the era of molecularprecision medicine, "molecular pathology" and "epidemiology" was integrated to create a new interdisciplinary field of "molecular pathological epidemiology" (MPE),[32][33]defined as "epidemiology of molecular pathology and heterogeneity of disease". In MPE, investigators analyze the relationships between (A) environmental, dietary, lifestyle and genetic factors; (B) alterations in cellular or extracellular molecules; and (C) evolution and progression of disease. A better understanding of heterogeneity of diseasepathogenesiswill further contribute to elucidateetiologiesof disease. The MPE approach can be applied to not only neoplastic diseases but also non-neoplastic diseases.[34]The concept and paradigm of MPE have become widespread in the 2010s.[35][36][37][38][39][40][41][excessive citations]
By 2012, it was recognized that many pathogens'evolutionis rapid enough to be highly relevant to epidemiology, and that therefore much could be gained from an interdisciplinary approach to infectious disease integrating epidemiology andmolecular evolutionto "inform control strategies, or even patient treatment."[42][43]Modern epidemiological studies can use advanced statistics andmachine learningto createpredictive modelsas well as to define treatment effects.[44][45]There is increasing recognition that a wide range of modern data sources, many not originating from healthcare or epidemiology, can be used for epidemiological study. Such digital epidemiology can include data from internet searching, mobile phone records and retail sales of drugs.[citation needed]

## Types of studies
Epidemiologists employ a range of study designs from the observational to experimental and generally categorized as descriptive (involving the assessment of data covering time, place, and person), analytic (aiming to further examine known associations or hypothesized relationships), and experimental (a term often equated with clinical or community trials of treatments and other interventions). In observational studies, nature is allowed to "take its course", as epidemiologists observe from the sidelines. Conversely, in experimental studies, the epidemiologist is the one in control of all of the factors entering a certain case study.[46]Epidemiological studies are aimed, where possible, at revealing unbiased relationships betweenexposuressuch as alcohol or smoking,biological agents,stress, orchemicalstomortalityormorbidity. The identification of causal relationships between these exposures and outcomes is an important aspect of epidemiology. Modern epidemiologists useinformaticsandinfodemiology[47][48]as tools.[citation needed][49][50][51]
Observational studies have two components, descriptive and analytical. Descriptive observations pertain to the "who, what, where and when of health-related state occurrence". However, analytical observations deal more with the 'how' of a health-related event.[46]Experimental epidemiologycontains three case types: randomized controlled trials (often used for a new medicine or drug testing), field trials (conducted on those at a high risk of contracting a disease), and community trials (research on social originating diseases).[46]
The term 'epidemiologic triad' is used to describe the intersection ofHost,Agent, andEnvironmentin analyzing an outbreak.[52]
===\when they are unexposed.[53]
The former type of study is purely descriptive and cannot be used to make inferences about the general population of patients with that disease. These types of studies, in which an astute clinician identifies an unusual feature of a disease or a patient's history, may lead to a formulation of a new hypothesis. Using the data from the series, analytic studies could be done to investigate possible causal factors. These can include case-control studies or prospective studies. A case-control study would involve matching comparable controls without the disease to the cases in the series. A prospective study would involve following the case series over time to evaluate the disease's natural history.[54]
The latter type, more formally described asself-controlled case-seriesstudies, divide individual patient follow-up time into exposed and unexposed periods and use fixed-effects Poisson regression processes to compare the incidence rate of a given outcome between exposed and unexposed periods. This technique has been extensively used in the study of adverse reactions to vaccination and has been shown in some circumstances to provide statistical power comparable to that available in cohort studies.[citation needed]

## Case-control studies
Case-control studiesselect subjects based on their disease status. It is a retrospective study. A group of individuals that are disease positive (the "case" group) is compared with a group of disease negative individuals (the "control" group). The control group should ideally come from the same population that gave rise to the cases. The case-control study looks back through time at potential exposures that both groups (cases and controls) may have encountered. A 2×2 table is constructed, displaying exposed cases (A), exposed controls (B), unexposed cases (C) and unexposed controls (D). The statistic generated to measure association is theodds ratio(OR),[55]which is the ratio of the odds of exposure in the cases (A/C) to the odds of exposure in the controls (B/D), i.e. OR = (AD/BC).[citation needed]
If the OR is significantly greater than 1, then the conclusion is "those with the disease are more likely to have been exposed", whereas if it is close to 1 then the exposure and disease are not likely associated. If the OR is far less than one, then this suggests that the exposure is a protective factor in the causation of the disease.
Case-control studies are usually faster and more cost-effective thancohort studiesbut are sensitive to bias (such asrecall biasandselection bias). The main challenge is to identify the appropriate control group; the distribution of exposure among the control group should be representative of the distribution in the population that gave rise to the cases. This can be achieved by drawing a random sample from the original population at risk. This has as a consequence that the control group can contain people with the disease under study when the disease has a high attack rate in a population.[citation needed]
A major drawback for case control studies is that, in order to be considered to be statistically significant, the minimum number of cases required at the 95% confidence interval is related to the odds ratio by the equation:
where N is the ratio of cases to controls.
As the odds ratio approaches 1, the number of cases required for statistical significance grows towards infinity; rendering case-control studies all but useless for low odds ratios. For instance, for an odds ratio of 1.5 and cases = controls, the table shown above would look like this:
For an odds ratio of 1.1:

## Cohort studies
Cohort studiesselect subjects based on their exposure status. The study subjects should be at risk of the outcome under investigation at the beginning of the cohort study; this usually means that they should be disease free when the cohort study starts. The cohort is followed through time to assess their later outcome status. An example of a cohort study would be the investigation of a cohort of smokers and non-smokers over time to estimate the incidence of lung cancer. The same 2×2 table is constructed as with the case control study. However, the point estimate generated is therelative risk(RR), which is the probability of disease for a person in the exposed group,Pe=A/ (A+B) over the probability of disease for a person in the unexposed group,Pu=C/ (C+D), i.e.RR=Pe/Pu.
As with the OR, a RR greater than 1 shows association, where the conclusion can be read "those with the exposure were more likely to develop the disease."
Prospective studies have many benefits over case control studies. The RR is a more powerful effect measure than the OR, as the OR is just an estimation of the RR, since true incidence cannot be calculated in a case control study where subjects are selected based on disease status. Temporality can be established in a prospective study, and confounders are more easily controlled for. However, they are more costly, and there is a greater chance of losing subjects to follow-up based on the long time period over which the cohort is followed.
Cohort studies also are limited by the same equation for number of cases as for cohort studies, but, if the base incidence rate in the study population is very low, the number of cases required is reduced by1⁄2.

## Causal inference
Although epidemiology is sometimes viewed as a collection of statistical tools used to elucidate the associations of exposures to health outcomes, a deeper understanding of this science is that of discoveringcausalrelationships.
"Correlation does not imply causation" is a common theme for much of the epidemiological literature. For epidemiologists, the key is in the terminference. Correlation, or at least association between two variables, is a necessary but not sufficient criterion for the inference that one variable causes the other. Epidemiologists use gathered data and a broad range of biomedical and psychosocial theories in an iterative way to generate or expand theory, to test hypotheses, and to make educated, informed assertions about which relationships are causal, and about exactly how they are causal.
Epidemiologists emphasize that the "one cause – one effect" understanding is a simplistic mis-belief.[56]Most outcomes, whether disease or death, are caused by a chain or web consisting of many component causes.[57]Causes can be distinguished as necessary, sufficient or probabilistic conditions. If a necessary condition can be identified and controlled (e.g., antibodies to a disease agent, energy in an injury), the harmful outcome can be avoided (Robertson, 2015). One tool regularly used to conceptualize the multicausality associated with disease is thecausal pie model.[58]

## Bradford Hill criteria
In 1965,Austin Bradford Hillproposed a series of considerations to help assess evidence of causation,[59]which have come to be commonly known as the "Bradford Hill criteria". In contrast to the explicit intentions of their author, Hill's considerations are now sometimes taught as a checklist to be implemented for assessing causality.[60]Hill himself said "None of my nine viewpoints can bring indisputable evidence for or against the cause-and-effect hypothesis and none can be requiredsine qua non."[59]

## Legal interpretation
Epidemiological studiescan only go to prove that an agent could have caused, but not that it did cause, an effect in any particular case:
Epidemiology is concerned with theincidenceof disease in populations and does not address the question of the cause of an individual's disease. This question, sometimes referred to as specific causation, is beyond the domain of the science of epidemiology. Epidemiology has its limits at the point where an inference is made that the relationship between an agent and a disease is causal (general causation) and where the magnitude of excess risk attributed to the agent has been determined; that is, epidemiology addresses whether an agent can cause disease, not whether an agent did cause a specific plaintiff's disease.[61]
In United States law, epidemiology alone cannot prove that a causal association does not exist in general. Conversely, it can be (and is in some circumstances) taken by US courts, in an individual case, to justify an inference that a causal association does exist, based upon a balance ofprobability.
The subdiscipline of forensic epidemiology is directed at the investigation of specific causation of disease or injury in individuals or groups of individuals in instances in which causation is disputed or is unclear, for presentation in legal settings.

## Population-based health management
Epidemiological practice and the results of epidemiological analysis make a significant contribution to emerging population-based health management frameworks.
Population-based health management encompasses the ability to:
Modern population-based health management is complex, requiring a multiple set of skills (medical, political, technological, mathematical, etc.) of which epidemiological practice and analysis is a core component, that is unified with management science to provide efficient and effective health care and health guidance to a population. This task requires the forward-looking ability of modern risk management approaches that transform health risk factors, incidence, prevalence and mortality statistics (derived from epidemiological analysis) into management metrics that not only guide how a health system responds to current population health issues but also how a health system can be managed to better respond to future potential population health issues.[62]
Examples of organizations that use population-based health management that leverage the work and results of epidemiological practice include Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control, Health Canada Tobacco Control Programs, Rick Hansen Foundation, Canadian Tobacco Control Research Initiative.[63][64][65]
Each of these organizations uses a population-based health management framework called Life at Risk that combines epidemiological quantitative analysis with demographics, health agency operational research and economics to perform:

## Applied field epidemiology
Applied epidemiology is the practice of using epidemiological methods to protect or improve the health of a population. Applied field epidemiology can include investigating communicable and non-communicable disease outbreaks, mortality and morbidity rates, and nutritional status, among other indicators of health, with the purpose of communicating the results to those who can implement appropriate policies or disease control measures.

## Humanitarian context
As the surveillance and reporting of diseases and other health factors become increasingly difficult in humanitarian crisis situations, the methodologies used to report the data are compromised. One study found that less than half (42.4%) of nutrition surveys sampled from humanitarian contexts correctly calculated the prevalence of malnutrition and only one-third (35.3%) of the surveys met the criteria for quality. Among the mortality surveys, only 3.2% met the criteria for quality. As nutritional status and mortality rates help indicate the severity of a crisis, the tracking and reporting of these health factors is crucial.
Vital registries are usually the most effective ways to collect data, but in humanitarian contexts these registries can be non-existent, unreliable, or inaccessible. As such, mortality is often inaccurately measured using either prospective demographic surveillance or retrospective mortality surveys. Prospective demographic surveillance requires much manpower and is difficult to implement in a spread-out population. Retrospective mortality surveys are prone to selection and reporting biases. Other methods are being developed, but are not common practice yet.[66][67][68][69]

## Epidemic wave
The concept of waves in epidemics has implications especially forcommunicable diseases. A working definition for the term "epidemic wave" is based on two key features: 1) it comprises periods of upward or downward trends, and 2) these increases or decreases must be substantial and sustained over a period of time, in order to distinguish them from minor fluctuations or reporting errors.[70]The use of a consistent scientific definition is to provide a consistent language that can be used to communicate about and understand the progression of the COVID-19 pandemic, which would aid healthcare organizations and policymakers in resource planning and allocation.

## Validities
Different fields in epidemiology have different levels of validity. One way to assess the validity of findings is the ratio of false-positives (claimed effects that are not correct) to false-negatives (studies which fail to support a true effect). Ingenetic epidemiology, candidate-gene studies may produce over 100 false-positive findings for each false-negative. By contrast genome-wide association appear close to the reverse, with only one false positive for every 100 or more false-negatives.[71]This ratio has improved over time in genetic epidemiology, as the field has adopted stringent criteria. By contrast, other epidemiological fields have not required such rigorous reporting and are much less reliable as a result.[71]

## Random error
Random error is the result of fluctuations around a true value because of sampling variability. Random error is just that: random. It can occur during data collection, coding, transfer, or analysis. Examples of random errors include poorly worded questions, a misunderstanding in interpreting an individual answer from a particular respondent, or a typographical error during coding. Random error affects measurement in a transient, inconsistent manner and it is impossible to correct for random error. There is a random error in all sampling procedures –sampling error.[citation needed]
Precision in epidemiological variables is a measure of random error. Precision is also inversely related to random error, so that to reduce random error is to increase precision. Confidence intervals are computed to demonstrate the precision of relative risk estimates. The narrower the confidence interval, the more precise the relative risk estimate.
There are two basic ways to reduce random error in anepidemiological study. The first is to increase the sample size of the study. In other words, add more subjects to your study. The second is to reduce the variability in measurement in the study. This might be accomplished by using a more precise measuring device or by increasing the number of measurements.
Note, that if sample size or number of measurements are increased, or a more precise measuring tool is purchased, the costs of the study are usually increased. There is usually an uneasy balance between the need for adequate precision and the practical issue of study cost.

## Systematic error
A systematic error or bias occurs when there is a difference between the true value (in the population) and the observed value (in the study) from any cause other than sampling variability. An example of systematic error is if, unknown to you, thepulse oximeteryou are using is set incorrectly and adds two points to the true value each time a measurement is taken. The measuring device could beprecise but not accurate. Because the error happens in every instance, it is systematic. Conclusions you draw based on that data will still be incorrect. But the error can be reproduced in the future (e.g., by using the same mis-set instrument).
A mistake in coding that affectsallresponses for that particular question is another example of a systematic error.
The validity of a study is dependent on the degree of systematic error. Validity is usually separated into two components:

## Selection bias
Selection biasoccurs when study subjects are selected or become part of the study as a result of a third, unmeasured variable which is associated with both the exposure and outcome of interest.[72]For instance, it has repeatedly been noted that cigarette smokers and non smokers tend to differ in their study participation rates. (Sackett D cites the example of Seltzer et al., in which 85% of non smokers and 67% of smokers returned mailed questionnaires.)[73]Such a difference in response will not lead to bias if it is not also associated with a systematic difference in outcome between the two response groups.

## Information bias
Information biasis bias arising from systematic error in the assessment of a variable.[74]An example of this is recall bias. A typical example is again provided by Sackett in his discussion of a study examining the effect of specific exposures on fetal health: "in questioning mothers whose recent pregnancies had ended in fetal death or malformation (cases) and a matched group of mothers whose pregnancies ended normally (controls) it was found that 28% of the former, but only 20% of the latter, reported exposure to drugs which could not be substantiated either in earlier prospective interviews or in other health records".[73]In this example, recall bias probably occurred as a result of women who had had miscarriages having an apparent tendency to better recall and therefore report previous exposures.

## Design-related bias
Next to sample- and variable-related bias, bias can also arise from an imperfect study design. One example is immortal time bias, where during study period, there is some interval during which the outcome event cannot occur (making these individual "immortal").[75][76]

## Confounding
Confoundinghas traditionally been defined as bias arising from the co-occurrence or mixing of effects of extraneous factors, referred to as confounders, with the main effect(s) of interest.[74][77]A more recent definition of confounding invokes the notion ofcounterfactualeffects.[77]According to this view, when one observes an outcome of interest, say Y=1 (as opposed to Y=0), in a given population A which is entirely exposed (i.e. exposureX= 1 for every unit of the population) the risk of this event will beRA1. The counterfactual or unobserved riskRA0corresponds to the risk which would have been observed if these same individuals had been unexposed (i.e.X= 0 for every unit of the population). The true effect of exposure therefore is:RA1−RA0(if one is interested in risk differences) orRA1/RA0(if one is interested in relative risk). Since the counterfactual riskRA0is unobservable we approximate it using a second population B and we actually measure the following relations:RA1−RB0orRA1/RB0. In this situation, confounding occurs whenRA0≠RB0.[77](NB: Example assumes binary outcome and exposure variables.)
Some epidemiologists prefer to think of confounding separately from common categorizations of bias since, unlike selection and information bias, confounding stems from real causal effects.[72]

## The profession
Few universities have offered epidemiology as a course of study at the undergraduate level.[citation needed]An undergraduate program exists atJohns Hopkins Universityin which students who major in public health can take graduate-level courses—including epidemiology—during their senior year at theBloomberg School of Public Health.[78]In addition to its master's and doctoral degrees in epidemiology, theUniversity of Michigan School of Public Healthhas offered undergraduate degree programs since 2017 that include coursework in epidemiology.[79][80]
Although epidemiologic research is conducted by individuals from diverse disciplines, variable levels of training in epidemiologic methods are provided duringpharmacy,medical,veterinary,social work,podiatry,nursing,physical therapy, andclinical psychologydoctoral programs in addition to the formal training master's and doctoral students in public health fields receive.
As public health practitioners, epidemiologists work in a number of different settings. Some epidemiologists work "in the field" (i.e., in the community; commonly[according to whom?]in a public health service), and are often at the forefront of investigating and combating disease outbreaks.[citation needed]Others work for non-profit organizations, universities, hospitals, or larger government entities (e.g., state and local health departments in the United States), ministries of health,Doctors without Borders, theCenters for Disease Control and Prevention(CDC), theHealth Protection Agency, theWorld Health Organization(WHO), or thePublic Health Agency of Canada. Epidemiologists can also work in for-profit organizations (e.g., pharmaceutical and medical device companies) in groups such as market research or clinical development.

## COVID-19
An April 2020University of Southern Californiaarticle noted that, "Thecoronavirus epidemic... thrust epidemiology – the study of the incidence, distribution and control of disease in a population – to the forefront of scientific disciplines across the globe and even made temporary celebrities out of some of its practitioners."[81]