## Fertilizer
Afertilizerorfertiliseris any material of natural or synthetic origin that is applied tosoilor toplant tissuesto supplyplant nutrients. Fertilizers may be distinct fromliming materialsor other non-nutrientsoil amendments. Many sources of fertilizer exist, both natural andindustriallyproduced.[1]For most modernagricultural practices, fertilization focuses on three mainmacronutrients:nitrogen(N),phosphorus(P), andpotassium(K) with occasional addition of supplements likerock flourformicronutrients. Farmers apply these fertilizers in a variety of ways: through dry orpelletizedor liquid application processes, using largeagricultural equipment, orhand-toolmethods.
Historically, fertilization came from natural or organic sources:compost,animal manure,human manure, harvestedminerals,crop rotations, and byproducts of human-nature industries (e.g.fish processing waste, orbloodmealfromanimal slaughter).[2]However, starting in the 19th century, after innovations inplant nutritionfollowingJustus von Liebig's discoveries, anagricultural industrydeveloped around synthetically createdagrochemical fertilizers.[3]This transition was important in transforming theglobal food systemtowards larger-scaleindustrial agriculturewith large crop yields inmonocultures.[4]
The invention ofHaber processfor producingammoniafor nitrogen in the 20th century combined with amplifiedchemical production capacitycreated duringWorld War IIled to a boom in usingnitrogen fertilizers.[5]In the latter half of the 20th century, increased use of nitrogen fertilizers (800% increase between 1961 and 2019) has been a crucial component of the increased productivity ofconventional food systemsas part of the so-called "Green Revolution".[6]
Fertilizers, especially when applied excessively, can have environmental consequences such aswater pollution[7]andeutrophication[8]due to nutrientrunoff.[9]Additionally, the chemical process for creating the fertilizers results in byproducts, includingcarbonand other emissions.[10]In some casescontamination and pollution of soilresult by accumulation ofheavy metalscontained in some fertilizers collected through mining.[11]Sustainable agriculturalpractices, such asreduced tillageand plantingbuffer strips, can minimize these adverse environmental effects.[12]

## History
Management ofsoil fertilityhas preoccupied farmers since the beginning of agriculture.Middle Eastern,[16]Chinese,[17]Mesoamerican,[18]andcultures of the Central Andes[19]were all early adopters of agriculture. This is thought to have led to their cultures growing faster in population which allowed an exportation of culture to neighboring hunter-gatherer groups.[20]Fertilizer use along with agriculture allowed some of these early societies a critical advantage over their neighbors, leading them to become dominant cultures in their respective regions.[21][22]Egyptians,Romans,Babylonians, and earlyGermansare all recorded as usingmineralsormanureto enhance theproductivityof their farms.[1]The scientific research ofplant nutritionstarted well before the work of German chemistJustus von Liebigalthough his name is most mentioned as the "father of the fertilizer industry".[23]Nicolas Théodore de Saussureand scientific colleagues at the time were quick to disprove the simplifications of von Liebig.[24]Prominent scientists whom von Liebig drew wereCarl Ludwig SprengerandHermann Hellriegel.[25]In this field, a 'knowledge erosion' took place,[26]partly driven by an intermingling of economics and research.[27]John Bennet Lawes, an Englishentrepreneur, began experimenting on the effects of variousmanureson plants growing in pots in 1837, and a year or two later the experiments were extended to crops in the field. One immediate consequence was that in 1842 he patented a manure formed by treatingphosphateswithsulfuric acid, and thus was the first to create the artificial manure industry. In the succeeding year, he enlisted the services ofJoseph Henry Gilbert; together they performed crop experiments at theInstitute of Arable Crops Research.[28]
TheBirkeland–Eyde processwas one of the competing industrial processes at the beginning of nitrogen-based fertilizer production.[29]This process was used to fix atmosphericnitrogen(N2) intonitric acid(HNO3), one of several chemical processes callednitrogen fixation. The resultant nitric acid was then used as a source ofnitrate(NO3−). A factory based on the process was built inRjukanandNotoddenin Norway and largehydroelectric powerfacilities were built.[30]
The 1910s and 1920s witnessed the rise of theHaber processand theOstwald process. The Haber process producesammonia(NH3) frommethane(CH4) (natural gas) andmolecular nitrogen(N2) from the air. The ammonia from the Haber process is then partially converted intonitric acid(HNO3) in theOstwald process.[31]It is estimated that a third of annual global food production uses ammonia from theHaber–Bosch processand that this supports nearly half the world's population.[32][33]AfterWorld War II, nitrogen production plants that had ramped up for wartime bomb manufacturing were pivoted towards agricultural uses.[34]The use of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers has increased steadily over the last 50 years of the 20th century, rising almost 20-fold to a rate of 100 milliontonnesof nitrogen per year in 2003.[35]
The development of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers has significantly supported globalpopulation growth. It has been estimated that almost half the people on the Earth are currently fed due to synthetic nitrogen fertilizer use.[36]The use of phosphate fertilizers has also increased from 9 million tonnes per year in 1960 to 40 million tonnes per year in 2000, but future phosphorus fertilizer availability is now a critical issue.[37]
Agricultural use of inorganic fertilizers in 2021 was 195 million tonnes of nutrients, of which 56% was nitrogen.[38]Asia represented 53% of the world's total agricultural use of inorganic fertilizers in 2021, followed by the Americas (29%), Europe (12%), Africa (4%) and Oceania (2%). This ranking of the regions is the same for all nutrients. The main users of inorganic fertilizers are, in descending order, China, India, Brazil, and the United States of America (see Table 15), with China the largest user of each nutrient.[38]
Amaizecrop yielding 6–9 tonnes of grain perhectare(2.5 acres) requires 31–50 kilograms (68–110 lb) ofphosphatefertilizer to be applied;soybeancrops require about half, 20–25 kg per hectare.[39]Yara Internationalis the world's largest producer of nitrogen-based fertilizers.[40]

## Mechanism
Fertilizers enhance the growth of plants. This goal is met in two ways, the traditional one being additives that providenutrients. The second mode by which some fertilizers act is to enhance the effectiveness of the soil by modifying its water-holding capacity and aeration.[41]This article, like many on fertilizers, emphasizes the nutritional aspect.
Fertilizers typically provide, in varyingproportions:[42]
Although calcium uptake by plant roots has long-time been considered as luxury consumption,[48]it is now considered as an essential element for its various roles in the maintenance of the integrity of plantcell wallsandcell membranes.[49]liminghas also a decisive and positive influence oncrop yieldsby couteractingsoil acidification,[50]a side-effect ofplant growth[51]and nutrient export by crops,[52]improvingsoil structure, and thussoil aeration,[53]and increasing soil biological activity, therebysoil fertility, in particular through increasednitrification.[54]
Thenutrientsrequired for healthy plant life are classified according to theelements, but the elements are not used as fertilizers. Instead,compoundscontaining these elements are the basis of fertilizers. Macro-nutrients are present in plant tissue in quantities from 0.15% to 6.0% on adry matter(DM) (0% moisture) basis but they are sometimes consumed in larger quantities than required (luxury consumption), in particular when fertilizers are used in excess of plant requirements (overfertilization).[55]Plants are made up of four main elements:hydrogen,oxygen,carbon, andnitrogen. Carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen are widely available respectively incarbon dioxideand inwater. Although nitrogen makes up most of theatmosphere, it is in a form that is unavailable to plants. Nitrogen is the most important fertilizer since nitrogen is present inproteins(amide bondsbetweenamino acids),DNA(puricandpyrimidicbases), and other components (e.g.,tetrapyrrolichemeinchlorophyll). It is common tenet that nitrogen is absent from theparent rockand thus cannot be obtained frommineral weathering, although recent studies point to the equal importance of the atmosphere and bedrock as nitrogen sources.[56]Nitrogen is made available to plants throughweatheringof nitrogen-containingparent rocks[57]andnitrogen fixation. Only some free-living (e.g.Clostridium) andsymbiotic bacterialiving in root systems ofhost plants(notablylegumes) can fix atmospheric nitrogen (N2) by converting it toammonia(NH3) andamino acidswhich are available to plants.[58][59]Phosphate(PO3−4) is required for the production ofDNA(genetic code) andATP, the main energy carrier incells, as well as certainlipids(phospholipids, the main components of thelipidic double layerof thecell membranes).[60]

## Microbiological considerations
Two sets ofenzymatic reactionsare highly relevant to the efficiency of nitrogen-based fertilizers.
The first is thehydrolysis(reaction with water) ofurea(CO(NH2)2). Manysoilbacteriapossess the enzymeurease, whichcatalyzesthe conversion of urea toammoniumion (NH+4) andbicarbonateion(HCO−3).[61]
Ammonia-oxidizing bacteria(AOB), such as species ofNitrosomonas,oxidizeammonia (NH3) tonitrite(NO−2), a process termednitrification.[62]Nitrite-oxidizing bacteria, especiallyNitrobacter, oxidizenitrite(NO−2) tonitrate(NO−3), which is extremelysolubleand mobile, beingleachedeasily togroundwaterthen to rivers then to the sea, and is a major cause ofeutrophication[63]andalgal bloomsin rivers, lakes and sea shores.[64]

## Classification
Fertilizers are classified in several ways. They are classified according to whether they provide a single nutrient (e.g., K, P, or N), in which case they are classified asstraight fertilizers.Multinutrient fertilizers(orcomplex fertilizers) provide two or more nutrients, for example, N and P combined. Fertilizers are also sometimes classified as inorganic (the topic of most of this article) versus organic. Inorganic fertilizers exclude carbon-containing materials excepturea. Organic fertilizers are usually (recycled) plant- or animal-derived matter (e.g.compost,manure, respectively). Inorganic are sometimes called synthetic fertilizers since various chemical treatments are required for their manufacture.[65]

## Single nutrient ("straight") fertilizers
The main nitrogen-based straight fertilizer isammonia(NH3),ionizedin solution asammonium(NH4+), applied in the form ofsaltsorderivatives, including:
The main straight phosphate fertilizers are thesuperphosphates:
A mixture of single superphosphate and triple superphosphate is called double superphosphate. More than 90% of a typical superphosphate fertilizer is water-soluble.
The main potassium-based straight fertilizer ismuriate of potash(MOP, 95–99% KCl). It is typically available as 0-0-60 or 0-0-62 fertilizer.

## Multinutrient fertilizers
These fertilizers are common. They consist of two or more nutrient components.
Major two-component fertilizers provide both nitrogen and phosphorus to the plants. These are called NP fertilizers. The main NP fertilizers are
About 85% of MAP and DAP fertilizers are soluble in water.
NPK fertilizers are three-component fertilizers providing nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. There exist two types of NPK fertilizers: compound and blends. Compound NPK fertilizers contain chemically bound ingredients, while blended NPK fertilizers are physical mixtures of single nutrient components.
NPK ratingis a rating system describing the amount of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in a fertilizer. NPK ratings consist of three numbers separated by dashes (e.g., 10-10-10 or 16–4–8) describing the chemical content of fertilizers.[67]The first number represents the percentage of nitrogen in the product; the second number, P2O5; the third, K2O. Fertilizers do not actually contain P2O5or K2O, but the system is a conventional shorthand for the amount of the phosphorus (P) or potassium (K) in a fertilizer. A 50-pound (23 kg) bag of fertilizer labeled 16-4-8 contains 8 lb (3.6 kg) of nitrogen (16% of the 50 pounds), an amount of phosphorus equivalent to that in 2 pounds of P2O5(4% of 50 pounds), and 4 pounds of K2O (8% of 50 pounds). Most fertilizers are labeled according to this N-P-K convention, although Australian convention, following an N-P-K-S system, adds a fourth number for sulfur, and uses elemental values for all values including P and K.[68]

## Micronutrients
Micronutrientsare consumed in smaller quantities and are present in plant tissue on the order ofparts-per-million(ppm), ranging from 0.15 to 400 ppm or less than 0.04% dry matter.[69][70]These elements are often required asco-enzymesforenzymesessential to the plant'smetabolism. Because these elements enablecatalysts(enzymes), their impact far exceeds theirconcentration. Typical micronutrients areboron,zinc,molybdenum,iron, andmanganese.[42]These elements are provided as water-soluble salts. Iron presents special problems because it converts from soluble (ferrous) to insoluble bio-unavailable (ferric) compounds at moderate soil pH and phosphate concentrations.[71]For this reason, iron is often administered as achelate complex, e.g., theEDTAorEDDHAderivatives. The micronutrient needs depend on the plant and the environment. For example,sugar beetsappear to requireboron, andlegumesrequirecobalt,[1]while environmental conditions such as heat or drought make boron less available for plants, causingboron deficiency.[72]

## Production
The production of synthetic, or inorganic, fertilizers require prepared chemicals,[73]whereas organic fertilizers are derived from thebiological processingof plant and animal remains orexcreta(e.g.urine,feces).[74]

## Nitrogen fertilizers
Nitrogen fertilizers are made fromammonia(NH3)producedby theHaber–Bosch process.[66]In thisenergy-intensiveprocess,natural gas(CH4)usuallysupplies the hydrogen, and the nitrogen (N2) isderived from the air. This ammonia is used as afeedstockfor all other nitrogen fertilizers, such asanhydrous ammonium nitrate(NH4NO3) andurea(CO(NH2)2).
Deposits ofsodium nitrate(NaNO3) (Chilean saltpeter) are also found in theAtacama DesertinChileand were one of the original (1830) nitrogen-rich fertilizers used.[75]It is still mined for fertilizer use.[76]Nitrates are also produced from ammonia by theOstwald process.

## Phosphate fertilizers
Phosphate fertilizers are obtained by extraction fromphosphate rock, which contains two principal phosphorus-containing minerals,fluorapatiteCa5(PO4)3F (CFA) andhydroxyapatiteCa5(PO4)3OH. Billions of kg of phosphate rock are mined annually, but the size and quality of the remaining ore is decreasing.[37]These minerals are converted into water-soluble phosphate salts by treatment withacids.[77]The large production ofsulfuric acidis primarily motivated by this application.[78]In thenitrophosphate processor Odda process (invented in 1927),phosphate rockwith up to a 20% phosphorus (P) content is dissolved withnitric acid(HNO3) to produce a mixture ofphosphoric acid(H3PO4) andcalcium nitrate(Ca(NO3)2). This mixture can be combined with a potassium fertilizer to produce acompound fertilizerwith the three macronutrients N, P and K in easily dissolved form.[79]

## Potassium fertilizers
Potashis a mixture of potassium minerals used to make potassium (chemical symbol: K) fertilizers. Potash is soluble in water, so the main effort in producing this nutrient from the ore involves some purification steps, e.g., to removesodium chloride(NaCl) (commonsalt).[80]Sometimes potash is referred to as K2O, as a matter of convenience to those describing the potassium content. In fact, potash fertilizers are usuallypotassium chloride,potassium sulfate,potassium carbonate, orpotassium nitrate.[81]

## NPK fertilizers
There are three major routes formanufacturingNPK fertilizers (named for their main ingredients: nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K)):
Step 1. Nitrophosphates are made by acidiculatingphosphate rockwithnitric acid.
Step 2. Removal of Calcium Nitrate. It is important to remove thecalcium nitratebecause calcium nitrate is extremelyhygroscopic.

## Organic fertilizers
Organic fertilizerscan describe those fertilizers with a biological origin, i.e. derived from living or formerly living materials.Organic fertilizerscan also describe commercially available and frequently packaged products that strive to follow the expectations and restrictions adopted byorganic farmingandenvironmentally friendlygardening, i.e. related systems of food and plant production that significantly limit or strictly avoid the use of synthetic fertilizers andpesticides. Theorganic fertilizer productstypically contain both some organic materials as well as acceptable additives such as nutritive rock powders, groundseashells(crab,oyster, etc.), other prepared products such as seed meal orkelp, and cultivatedmicroorganismsand derivatives.[82]
Fertilizers of an organic origin (the first definition) includeanimal wastes, plant wastes from agriculture,seaweed,compost, and treatedsewage sludge(biosolids). Beyond manures, animal sources can include products fromanimal slaughters:bloodmeal,bone meal,feather meal,hides,hoofs, andhornsall are typical components.[42]Organically derived materials available to industry such assewage sludgemay not be acceptable components oforganic farmingandgardening, because of factors ranging from residual contaminants[83]to public perception.[84]No matter the definition nor composition, most of these products contain less-concentrated nutrients, and the nutrients are not as easily quantified.[85]They can offer soil-building advantages as well as be appealing to those who are trying to farm or garden more naturally.[86]
In terms of volume,peatis the most widely used packaged organicsoil amendment. It is an immature form ofcoalwhich improvessoil aerationandmoistureand thus soil biological activity but confers no directnutritional valueto the plants. It is therefore not a fertilizer as defined in the beginning of the article, but rather anamendment.[87]Coir(derived fromcoconuthusks),bark, andsawdustare mainly applied asmulchand protects the soil fromdesiccation[88]while preventing the development ofweeds[89]and improving soil structure,[90]but do not confer anynutritional valueto the soil. Some organic additives can even have a reverse effect on nutrients. Freshsawdustcan consume soil nutrients as it breaks down and is colonized bywood-decay fungi, causingnitrogen deficiency(nitrogen drawdown) in the absence of nutrient addition.[91]However, this property can be used to capture excess mineral nitrogen.[92]These same organic soil texturizers (as well as compost, etc.) may increase the availability of nutrients through improvedcation-exchange capacity,[93]or through increased growth of microorganisms that in turn increase availability of certain plant nutrients.[94]True organic fertilizers such ascompostsandmanuresmay be distributed locally without going into industry production, making actual consumption more difficult to quantify.

## Fertilizer consumption
China has become the largest producer and consumer of nitrogen fertilizers[97]while Africa has little reliance on nitrogen fertilizers.[98]Agricultural and chemical minerals are very important in industrial use of fertilizers, which is valued at approximately $200 billion.[99]Nitrogen has a significant impact in the global mineral use, followed by potash and phosphate. The production of nitrogen has drastically increased since the 1960s. Phosphate and potash have increased in price since the 1960s, which is larger than the consumer price index.[99]Potash is produced inCanada,RussiaandBelarus, together making up over half of the world production.[99]Potash production in Canada rose in 2017 and 2018 by 18.6%.[100][101]Conservative estimates report 30 to 50% of crop yields are attributed to natural or synthetic commercial fertilizers.[81][102]Fertilizer consumption has surpassed the amount of farmland in the United States.[99]
Data on the fertilizer consumption per hectarearable landin 2012 are published byThe World Bank.[103]The diagram below shows fertilizer consumption by theEuropean Union(EU) countries as kilograms per hectare (pounds per acre). The total consumption of fertilizer in the EU reached a peak of 11.6 million tons in 2017 but decreased steadily since that time, down to 9.3 million tons in 2023[104]for 157 million hectares arable land area in 2020, 1.5 million hectares less than in 2010.[105]This figure equates to 70 kg of fertilizers consumed per ha arable land on average by the EU countries in 2020.

## Application
Fertilizers are commonly used for growing all crops, with application rates depending onsoil fertility, usually as measured by asoil testand according to the particular crop.Legumes, for example,fix nitrogenfrom the atmosphere and generally do not require nitrogen fertilizer, hence their promising use for ensuring agriculturesustainability.[106]

## Timing and amount of application
The timing of application of fertilizers (here only mineral fertilizers will be considered) is a function of crop requirements,weathercondition andmarketopportunities. It varies in nature and amount according to the type of agriculture (e.g.intensive farmingversusconservation agriculture,grasslandversusarable land), and the presence or absence of signs ofnutrient deficiencies. Timing fertilization with peak nutrient uptake demand is essential for optimizing both yield and quality. In general, nutrient uptake rates are highest from early to midgrowing season, which is why fertilization near the time of seeding is generally very effective. With fall-planted grains (e.g.winter wheat), fall N fertilization followed by springtopdressingis likely the best combination of fertilization practices to optimize yield.[107]The application of a soluble mineral fertilizer (e.g.ammonium nitrate) is avoided duringheavy rainfallbecause most of it would be lost for the crop[108]and would rapidly pollute theaquifer.[109]Inconservation agriculture(includingno-till farming,permaculture) as well as other non-organic alternatives tointensive farming(e.g.smallholdingagriculture) the application of mineral fertilizers is reduced to the strict requirements of the cultivated plants and sometimes is quite unnecessary.[110]
After harvest of a main crop (e.g.wheat,maize,potatoes) acatch cropcan be sown, using plant species with a rapid growth rate and high demand of nitrogen (e.g.white mustard).[111]This allows excess nitrogen, in particular the very mobilenitrateanion, to be taken up and transformed in plantproteins[112]before contaminating thegroundwater, and the associatedgeochemicalprocesses, which would rapidly occur in the absence of plant cover.[113]The catch crop is further buried, allowing its transformation inhumusin which nitrogen is fixed according to various stablechemical bonds.[114]

## Liquid vs solid
Fertilizers are applied to crops both as solids and as liquid. About 90% of fertilizers are applied as solids. The most widely used solid inorganic fertilizers areurea,diammonium phosphateandpotassium chloride.[115]Solid fertilizer is typically granulated or powdered. Often solids are available asprills, a solid globule. Liquid fertilizers comprise aqueous solutions ofammonia, aqueous solutions ofammonium nitrateorurea. These concentrated products may be diluted with water to form a concentrated liquid fertilizer (e.g.,UAN). Advantages of liquid fertilizer are its more rapid effect and easier coverage.[42]The addition of fertilizer to irrigation water is calledfertigation.[81]Granulated fertilizers are more economical to ship and store, not to mention easier to apply.[116][117]

## Slow- and controlled-release fertilizers
Acontrolled-release fertiliser(CRF) is agranulatedfertiliserthat releasesnutrientsgradually into thesoil(i.e., with acontrolled releaseperiod).[118]Controlled-release fertilizer is also known ascontrolled-availability fertilizer,delayed-release fertilizer,metered-release fertilizer, orslow-acting fertilizer. Usually slow- and controlled-release fertilizers refer to nitrogen-based fertilizers, e.g.ureaform, needing degradation by a wide spectrum ofsoil organismsbefore nitrogen could be liberated as nitrate.[119]Slow-release fertilizers (SRF) and controlled-release fertilizers (CRF) offer various benefits over conventional ones, ensuringsustainabilityin fertilizing practice.[120][121]

## Foliar application
Foliar fertilizersare applied directly to leaves. They can reduce the total amounts of fertilizer applied and achieve high fertilizer efficiency.[122]This method is almost invariably used to apply water-soluble straight nitrogen fertilizers and used especially for high-value crops such as fruits. Urea is the most common foliar fertilizer.[42]However,chelationof the foliar-applied nutrient is recommended for improving absorption and migration of the targeted nutrient and thereby avoiding loss to the soil and the groundwater.[122]

## Chemicals that affect nitrogen uptake
Various chemicals are used to enhance the efficiency of nitrogen-based fertilizers. In this way farmers can limit thepolluting effects of nitrogen run-off.Nitrificationinhibitors (also known as nitrogen stabilizers) suppress the conversion ofammoniaintonitrate, an anion that is more prone to leaching. 1-Carbamoyl-3-methylpyrazole (CMP),dicyandiamide,nitrapyrin(2-chloro-6-trichloromethylpyridine) and 3,4-dimethylpyrazole phosphate (DMPP) are popular.[123]Urease inhibitorsare used to slow the hydrolytic conversion of urea into ammonia catalyzed byureases, ammonia being prone to evaporation[124]as well as nitrification.[125]A popular inhibitor of ureases isN-(n-butyl)thiophosphoric triamide (NBPT).

## Overfertilization
Careful use of fertilization technologies is important because excess nutrients can be detrimental to the cultivated plant.[126]Fertilizer burncan occur when too much fertilizer is applied, resulting in damage or even death of the plant. Fertilizers vary in their tendency to burn roughly in accordance with theirsalt index.[127][128]

## Environmental effects
Synthetic fertilizers used in agriculture havewide-reaching environmental consequences.
According to theIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)Special Report on Climate Change and Land, production of these fertilizers and associatedland usepractices are drivers ofglobal warming.[6]The use of fertilizer has also led to a number of direct environmental consequences:agricultural runoffwhich leads to downstream effects likeocean dead zones[129]andwaterwaycontamination,[130]soil microbiomedegradation,[131]and accumulation oftoxic compoundsin ecosystems.[132]Indirect environmental impacts include: N-crop-pest cascades,[133]increasedgreenhouse gas emissionsandenvironmental impacts of frackingfor thenatural gasused in theHaber process,[134][135]the agricultural boom which is partially responsible for the rapidgrowth in human population[136]and large-scale industrial agricultural practices associated with it causingpressure on biodiversity,habitat destructionandfragmentation,[137]and agriculturalsoil loss.[138]
In order to mitigateenvironmentalandfood securityconcerns, theinternational communityhas includedfood systemsinSustainable Development Goal 2which focuses on creating aclimate-friendlyandsustainable food production system.[139]Mostpolicyand regulatory approaches to address these issues focus on pivotingagricultural practicestowardssustainableorregenerative agriculturalpractices: these use lesssynthetic fertilizers(for examplesustainable agriculture), bettersoil management(for exampleno-till agriculture) and moreorganic fertilizers(for exampleorganic farming,conservation agriculture,biodynamic agriculture).
For each ton ofphosphoric acidproduced by the processing ofphosphate rock, five tons ofwasteare generated. This waste takes the form of impure, useless, radioactive solid calledphosphogypsum. Estimates range from 100,000,000 and 280,000,000 tons of phosphogypsum waste produced annually worldwide.[140]

## Water
Phosphorus and nitrogen fertilizers can affect soil, surface water, andgroundwater[99]due to the dispersion of minerals intowaterwaysunder high rainfall,[141][142]snowmelt and canleachintogroundwaterover time.[143]Agriculturalrun-offis a major contributor to theeutrophicationoffreshwaterbodies. For example, in theUS, about half of all the lakes surveyed by theUnited States Environmental Protection Agency(US EPA) wereeutrophicin 2007 with a further alarming increase to 80 per cent in 2012.[144]The main contributor to eutrophication isphosphate, which is normally alimiting nutrient, besides nitrogen; high P concentrations promote the growth ofcyanobacteriaandalgae, thedemiseof which consumes oxygen.[145]Cyanobacteriablooms ('algal blooms') can also produce harmfultoxinsthat can accumulate in thefood chain, and can be harmful to humans.[146][147]Fertilizer run-off can be reduced by using weather-optimized fertilization strategies.[141]
The nitrogen-rich compounds found infertilizer runoffare the primary cause of seriousoxygen depletionin many parts ofoceans, especially in coastal zones,lakesandrivers.[148]The resulting lack of dissolved oxygen greatly reduces the ability of these areas to sustain oceanicfauna.[149]The number of oceanicdead zonesnear inhabited coastlines is increasing.[150]
As of 2006, the application of nitrogen fertilizer is being increasingly controlled in northwestern Europe[151]and the United States.[152][153]In cases whereeutrophicationcan be reversed, it may nevertheless take decades[154]and need significant soil management[155]before the accumulated nitrates ingroundwatercan be broken down by naturaldenitrification.[156]

## Nitrate pollution
Only a fraction of the nitrogen-based fertilizers is converted to plant matter. The remainder accumulates in the soil or is lost as run-off.[157]High application rates of nitrogen-containing fertilizers combined with the highwater solubilityof nitrate leads to increasedrunoffintosurface wateras well asleachingintogroundwater, thereby causinggroundwater pollution.[158][159][160]The excessive use of nitrogen-containing fertilizers (be they synthetic or natural) is particularly damaging, as much of the nitrogen that is not taken up by plants is transformed into nitrate which is easily leached.[161]
Nitrate levels above 10 mg/L (10 ppm) in groundwater can cause 'blue baby syndrome' (acquiredmethemoglobinemia).[162]The nutrients, especially nitrates, in fertilizers can cause problems for natural habitats and for human health if they are washed off intowatercoursesor leached through the soil intogroundwater.[163]Run-off can lead to fertilizingalgal bloomsthat use up all the oxygen and leave huge "dead zones" behind where other fish and aquatic life can not live.[164]

## Acidification
Soil acidification refers to the process by which thepHlevel of soil becomes more acidic over time. Soil pH is a measure of the soil's acidity or alkalinity and is determined on a scale from 0 to 14, with 7 being neutral. A pH value below 7 indicatesacidicsoil, while a pH value above 7 indicatesalkalineorbasicsoil. Soil acidification is a significant concern in agriculture and horticulture, leading to cation leaching, unstable soil aggregate structure, metal toxicity, decreased nutrient availability, and thus affecting soil biological properties and plant performances.[165]
Nitrogen-containing fertilizers releaseammoniumornitrateions, which canacidify the soilas they undergobiochemicalreactions.[166]When nitrogen-containing fertilizers, whether mineral or organic, are added to the soil, they increase the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+) in the soil solution, which lowers the pH of the soil.[167][168]This may lead to decrease innutrientavailability which may be offset byliming.[169]
Soil acidification occurs also throughacid rain, a man-inducedconcerndespite severe measures to suppress or mitigate industrialgas emissionssince the 1970s.[170]Among reported causes of acid rain, nitrogen fertilizers (whether mineral or organic), and the subsequent emissions ofnitrousandnitric oxidesare prominent in regions of intensive agriculture.[171]The mechanisms are complex, involvingammonia volatilizationfrom manure (whether stored or spread) or urea and direct redeposition followed bynitrificationin the soil or previous oxidation tonitrogen oxidesin the atmosphere before redeposition asnitric acid.[172]

## Cadmium
The concentration ofcadmiumin phosphorus-containing fertilizers varies considerably and can be problematic.[173]For example,mono-ammonium phosphatefertilizer may have a cadmium content of as low as 0.14 mg/kg or as high as 50.9 mg/kg.[174]Thephosphate rockused in their manufacture can contain as much as 188 mg/kg cadmium[175]Examples are deposits onNauru[176]and theChristmas Islands.[177]Continuous use of high-cadmium fertilizer can contaminate soils[178]andplants.[179]Limits to the cadmium content of phosphate fertilizers have been considered by theEuropean Commission.[180][181][182]Producers of phosphorus-containing fertilizers now select phosphate rock based on the cadmium content.[145]

## Fluoride
Phosphate rocks contain high levels offluoridein the form offluorapatite.[183]Consequently, the widespread use of phosphate fertilizers has increased soil fluoride concentrations.[179]It has been found thatfood contaminationfrom fertilizer is of little concern as plants accumulate little fluoride from the soil; of greater concern is the possibility of fluoride toxicity to livestock that ingest contaminated soil.[184][185]Also of possible concern are the effects of fluoride onsoil microorganisms.[184][185][186]

## Radioactive elements
Theradioactivecontent of the fertilizers varies considerably and depends both on their concentrations in the parent mineral and on the fertilizer production process.[179][187]Uranium-238concentrations can range from 7 to 100 pCi/g (picocuriesper gram) in phosphate rock[188]and from 1 to 67 pCi/g in phosphate fertilizers.[189][190][191]Where high annual rates of phosphorus fertilizer are used, this can result inuranium-238concentrations in soils anddrainage watersthat are several times greater than are normally present.[190][192]However, the impact of these increases on therisk to human healthfrom radinuclide contamination of foods is very small (less than 0.05 mSv/y).[190][193][194]

## Other metals
Steel industrywastes such as steelslagare often recycled as asoil amendmentor for the production of fertilizers due to their high Ca and Mg content and varioustrace elementsnecessary for plant growth.[195]However, they can also includetoxic metals.[196]Among them arearsenic,[197]cadmium,[197]chromium,[198]andnickel,[199]while steel slag amendment rather contribute to immobilizeleadin the soil and thus to decrease its toxicity to the cultivated plant.[200]The most common toxic elements in this type of fertilizer aremercury, lead, and arsenic.[201][202][203]Given the high cost of removing potentially harmful properties from steel slags,[204]a better solution is toimmobilizethem. The incorporation ofbiocharto steel slag make even the mixture a good amendement for the (passivation) ofheavy metalsin agricultural soil.[205]Highly pure fertilizers are widely available and perhaps best known as the highly water-soluble fertilizers containing blue dyes used aroundhouseholds, such asMiracle-Gro. These highly water-soluble fertilizers are used in theplant nurserybusiness and are available in larger packages at significantly less cost thanretailquantities. Some inexpensive retail granular garden fertilizers are made with high purity ingredients.[206]

## Trace mineral depletion
Attention has been addressed to the decreasing concentrations ofmicronutrientssuch asiron,zinc,copperandmagnesiumin many foods over the last 50–60 years.[207][208]Intensive farmingpractices, including the use of synthetic fertilizers, are frequently suggested as reasons for these declines and organic farming is often suggested as a solution.[208]Although improved crop yields resulting from NPK fertilizers are known to dilute the concentrations of other nutrients in plants,[207][209]much of the measured decline can be attributed to the use of progressively higher-yielding crop varieties that produce foods with lower mineral concentrations than their less-productive ancestors.[207][210][211]It is, therefore, unlikely thatorganic farmingor reduced use of fertilizers (e.g.conservation agriculture) will solve the problem; foods with high nutrient density are posited to be achieved using older, lower-yielding varieties or the development of new high-yield, nutrient-dense varieties.[207][212]
Fertilizers are, in fact, more likely to solve trace mineral deficiency problems than cause them: in Western Australia deficiencies ofzinc,copper,manganese,ironandmolybdenumwere identified as limiting the growth ofbroad-acrecrops and pastures in the 1940s and 1950s.[213]Soils in Western Australia are very old, highly weathered and deficient in many of the major nutrients and trace elements.[213]Since this time these trace elements are routinely added to fertilizers used in agriculture in this state.[213]Many other soils around the world are deficient in zinc, leading to deficiency in both plants and humans,[214]and zinc fertilizers are widely used to solve this problem.[215]

## Changes in soil biology
High levels of fertilizer may cause the breakdown of thesymbioticrelationships between plant roots andmycorrhizalfungi,[216]in particular when in excess of plant requirements.[217]It is still debated whether and how fertilizers affectsoil animals. Both organic and organic–mineral fertilizers increase the abundance of soil fauna whereas mineral fertilizers had no such effect, withidiosyncraticresponses of soil animal groups masking overall effects.[218]Chemical fertilizers stimulates the growth ofmicrobial populationsbut did not change their richness and diversity, while decreases inenzymatic activityhave been registered.[219]
The combination ofsoil acidificationand high nitrogen content was probably unknown to most soil organisms before the advent ofindustrial agriculture. More generally, soils are either acidic and nutrient-poor, or neutral to basic and nutrient-rich (nitrogen included), in relation to the pH-dependent capacity ofclay mineralsto hold nutrients.[220]This unexpected combination of excess nutrient availability and acidstresscauses a depletion in the sustainability of animal and microbial communities by weakening the linkages between aboveground and belowground components ofagroecosystems.[221]Otherecosystemsare also affected by nitrogen-enriched acid rains originationg from intensive agricultural practices.Sphagnum bogsare now shifting fromcarbon sinks(thanks to the accumulation of recalcitrant sphagnum litter andanoxicconditions) to carbon sources under the influence of nitrogen deposition and subsequent stimulation ofdecomposeractivity.[222]Other nutrient-poor ecosystems are also strongly affected, such as heathlands, with a surprising combination of highersoil organic matteraccumulation and highersoil enzymeactivity.[223]

## Organic agriculture
Two types of agricultural management practices includeorganic farmingandconventional agriculture. The former encouragessoil fertilityusing local resources to maximize efficiency. Organic agriculture avoids synthetic agrochemicals. Conventional agriculture uses all the components that organic agriculture does not use.[224]
The excess use of organic amendments (e.g. pigslurry) may have detrimental effects onwater qualitythrough contamination of theaquiferand subsequenteutrophicationof thewater bodiesit feds.[225]This is a societal concern in areas wherepig farmingconflicts withenvironmental protection.[226]

## Fossil fuel consumption and sustainability
Most synthetic fertilizer is fed from fossil fuel, using fossil energy andmethanefor producinghydrogenused in the synthesis of ammonia by theHaber process, as well as variouschemical reactionsused in the synthesis of most fertilizers (e.g.urea,ammonium nitrate,superphosphate).[227]Some alternatives have been proposed for the production of hydrogen, such assolar energy,[228]waste treatment,[229]orelectrolysis.[230]

## Contribution to the greenhouse effect
The amount ofgreenhouse gasescarbon dioxide,methaneandnitrous oxideproduced during themanufactureand use of nitrogen fertilizer is estimated as around 5% ofanthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. One third is produced during the production and two thirds during the use of fertilizers.[231]Nitrateis converted bysoil bacteriatonitrous oxide, agreenhouse gas.[232]Nitrous oxide emissions by humans, most of which are from fertilizer, between 2007 and 2016 were estimated at 700 million tons of CO2equivalent.[233]
Nitrogen fertilizer was used at a rate of about 110 million tons (of N) per year in 2012.[234][235]Nitrous oxide(N2O) is the third most importantgreenhouse gasaftercarbon dioxideandmethane. It has 296 times greater greenhouse effect per ton thancarbon dioxide. 2025 emissions contributed the equivalent of 700 megatons of CO2to the atmosphere.[236]It also contributes tostratosphericozone depletion.[237]Altering processes and procedures could reduce these emissions.[238]
Methane emissionsfrom crop fields (notably ricepaddy fields) are increased by the application of ammonium-based fertilizers. These emissions contribute to global climate change as methane is a potent greenhouse gas.[239][240]

## Regulation
In Europe, problems with high nitrate concentrations inrunoffare being addressed by the European Union's Nitrates Directive.[241]WithinBritain, farmers are encouraged to manage their land more sustainably in 'catchment-sensitive farming'.[242]In theUS, high concentrations of nitrate and phosphorus in runoff anddrainagewater are classified as nonpoint source pollutants due to their diffuse origin; this pollution is regulated at the state level.[243]OregonandWashington, both in theUnited States, have fertilizer registration programs with on-linedatabaseslisting chemical analyses of fertilizers.[244][245]Carbon emission tradingandeco-tariffsaffect the production and price of fertilizer.[246]

## Subsidies
InChina,regulationshave been implemented to control the use of N fertilizers in farming. In 2008, Chinese governments began to partially withdraw fertilizersubsidies, including subsidies to fertilizer transportation and to electricity and natural gas use in the industry. In consequence, the price of fertilizer has gone up and large-scale farms have begun to use less fertilizer. If large-scale farms keep reducing their use of fertilizer subsidies, they have no choice but to optimize the fertilizer they have which would therefore gain an increase in both grain yield and profit.[247]
In March 2022, theUnited States Department of Agricultureannounced a new $250M grant to promote American fertilizer production. Part of theCommodity Credit Corporation, the grant program will support fertilizer production that is independent of dominant fertilizer suppliers, made in America, and utilizing innovative production techniques to jumpstart future competition.[248]
In theEuropean UnionTheRusso-Ukrainian warand the subsequent strong increase in energy and mineral fertiliser prices highlighted the need for greater autonomy and efficiency in the production and use of fertilisers. The amended Temporary Crisis and Transition Framework for State Aid[249]enabled EU countries to provide specific support to farmers and fertiliser producers. Funds generated by measures such as the cap on the market revenues of certainelectricity generatorsand the solidarity contribution can also be used, subject to the applicable conditions, for purposes of national support schemes.[250]