## Film score
Afilm scoreis original music written specifically to accompany a film or a television program. The score consists of a number of orchestral, instrumental, or choral pieces calledcues, which are timed to begin and end at specific points during the film to enhance the dramatic narrative and emotional impact of scenes.[1]Scores are written by one or more composers under the guidance of or in collaboration with the film's director or producer and are then most often performed by an ensemble of musicians – usually including an orchestra (most likely asymphony orchestra) or band, instrumental soloists, and choir or vocalists – known as playback singers – and recorded by asound engineer. The term is less frequently applied to music written for media such aslive theatre, television and radio programs, and video games, and that music is typically referred to as either the soundtrack orincidental music.
Film scores encompass an enormous variety of styles of music depending on the nature of the films they accompany. While the majority of scores are orchestral works rooted inWestern classical music, many scores are also influenced byjazz, rock, pop,blues,new-ageandambient music, and a wide range of ethnic andworld musicstyles. Since the 1950s, a growing number of scores have also includedelectronic elements, and many scores written today feature a hybrid of orchestral and electronic instruments.[2]
Since the invention ofdigital technologyandaudio sampling, many modern films have been able to rely on digital samples to imitate the sound of acoustic instruments, and some scores are created and performed wholly by the composers themselves, by usingmusic composition software, synthesizers, samplers, andMIDI controllers.[citation needed]
Songs such as pop songs and rock songs are usually not considered part of the film's score,[3]though songs do also form part of the film's soundtrack.[4]Though some songs, especially inmusicals, are based on thematic ideas from the score (or vice versa), scores usually do not have lyrics, except when sung by choirs or soloists as part of a cue. Similarly, pop songs that are dropped into a specific scene in a film for emphasis or asdiegetic music(e.g., a song playing on a character's car radio) are not considered part of the score, though the score's composer occasionally writes an original pop song based on their themes, such asJames Horner's "My Heart Will Go On" fromTitanic, written forCeline Dion.

## Terminology
A film score is also called abackground score,background music,film soundtrack,film music,screen composition,screen music, orincidental music.[5]

## Spotting
The composer usually enters the creative process towards the end of filming at around the same time as the film is being edited, though on some occasions the composer is on hand during the entire film shoot, especially when actors are required to perform with or be aware of originaldiegeticmusic. The composer is shown an unpolished "rough cut" of the film before the editing is completed and talks to the director or producer about what sort of music is required for the film in terms of style and tone. The director and composer watch the entire film, noting which scenes require original music. During this process, composers take precise timing notes so that they know how long each cue must be, where it begins, where it ends, and of particular moments during a scene that music may need to coincide with in a specific way. This process is known asspotting.[6]
Occasionally, a filmmaker actually edits their film to fit the flow of music, rather than have the composer edit their score to the final cut. An extreme example of this isBaby Driverwritten and directed byEdgar Wright. DirectorGodfrey Reggioedited his filmsKoyaanisqatsiandPowaqqatsibased on composerPhilip Glass's music.[7]Similarly, the relationship between directorSergio Leoneand composerEnnio Morriconewas such that the finale ofThe Good, the Bad and the Uglyand the filmsOnce Upon a Time in the WestandOnce Upon a Time in Americawere edited to Morricone's score as the composer had prepared it months before the film's production ended.[8]
In another example, the finale ofSteven Spielberg'sE.T. the Extra-Terrestrialwas edited to match the music of his long-time collaboratorJohn Williams: as recounted in a companion documentary on the DVD, Spielberg gave Williams complete freedom with the music and asked him to record the cue without pictures; Spielberg then re-edited the scene later to match the music.
In some circumstances, a composer writes music based on their impressions of thescriptorstoryboardswithout seeing the film itself, and has more freedom to create music without the need to adhere to specific cue lengths or mirror the emotional arc of a particular scene. This approach is usually taken by a director who does not wish to have the music comment specifically on a particular scene or nuance of a film and which can instead be inserted into the film at any point the director wishes during the post-production process. ComposerHans Zimmerwas asked to write music in this way in 2010 for directorChristopher Nolan's filmInception;[9]composerGustavo Santaolalladid the same thing when he wrote his Oscar-winning score forBrokeback Mountain.[10]

## Syncing
When writing music for film, one goal is to sync dramatic events happening on screen with musical events in the score. There are many different methods for syncing music to picture. These include using sequencing software to calculate timings, using mathematic formulas and free timing with reference timings. Composers work usingSMPTE timecodefor syncing purposes.[11]
When syncing music to picture, generally a leeway of 3–4 frames late or early is sufficiently accurate. Using a technique calledfree timing, a conductor uses either a stopwatch, studio size stop clock, or watches the film on a screen while conducting the musicians to predetermined timings. These are represented visually by vertical lines (streamers) and bursts of light called punches. These are put on the film by the Music Editor at points specified by the composer. In both instances, timings on the clock or lines scribed on the film have corresponding timings that are also at specific points (beats) in the composer/conductor score.

## Written click track
A writtenclick trackis a method of writing bars of music in consistent time values (e.g., four beats in :02+2⁄3seconds) to establish a constant tempo in lieu of a metronome value in beats per minute (BPM). A composer uses a written click if planning to conduct live performers. When using other methods such as a metronome, the conductor has a perfectly spaced audible click playing. This can yield stiff and lifeless performances in slower more expressive cues. A standard BPM value can be converted to a written click where X represents the number of beats per bar and W represents time in seconds by using the following equation:
60bpm(x)=W{\displaystyle {\frac {60}{bpm}}(x)=W}
Written clicks are expressed using1⁄3second increments, so the next step is to round the decimal to either 0,1⁄3, or2⁄3of a second. The following is an example for 88BPM:
6088(4)=2.72{\displaystyle {\frac {60}{88}}(4)=2.72}
2.72 rounds to 2.66, so the written click is 4 beats in :02+2⁄3seconds.
Once the composer identifies the location in the film to sync with musically, they must determine the musical beat this event occurs on. To find this, conductors use the following equation, where BPM is beats per minute,spis the sync point in real-time (i.e. 33.7 seconds), and B is the beat number in1⁄3increments (i.e.49+2⁄3).
bpm(sp)60+1=B{\displaystyle {\frac {bpm(sp)}{60}}+1=B}

## Writing
Once the spotting session has been completed and the precise timings of each cue determined, the composer starts writing the score. The methods of writing the score vary from composer to composer. Some composers prefer to work with a traditional pencil and paper, writing notes by hand on astaffand performing works-in-progress for the director on a piano, while other composers write on computers using sophisticatedmusic composition softwaresuch asDigital Performer,Logic Pro,Finale,Cubase, orPro Tools.[12]Working with software allows composers to create MIDI-based demos of cues, calledMIDI mockups, for review by the filmmaker prior to the final orchestral recording.[13]
The length of time a composer has to write the score varies from project to project; depending on the post-production schedule, a composer may have as little as two weeks or as much as three months to write the score. In normal circumstances, the actual writing process usually lasts around six weeks from beginning to end.
The actual material of the score depends on several different variables that factor into how a composer may write - for instance, the emotion the composer is trying to convey, the nature of the character on screen, the scenery and geography of the set, along with multiple more different variables. A composition could consist of different instrumentations, varying genres, and different influential styles.
Each composer uses their own inspirations and pragmatic impressions that create unique and compelling sounds that can help to make a scene memorable. One example of this is in the "Lord of The Rings" score where Howard Shore uses a specific melodic idea to refer to The Shire by employing a tin flute to evoke a Celtic feeling. Shore does this throughout the three films of the trilogy to underscore a character's feeling of nostalgic reminiscence (Lawson, Macdonald, 2018).[14]
Other scores include not only original orchestrations but also popular music that represents the era and or the character being portrayed. Many films do this, such asGuardians of the GalaxyorBack to the Future. Alan Silvestri at times orchestrates compositions that are accompanied by tracks such as "The Power of Love" and "Back in Time", both by Huey Lewis and The News. This creates a sense of lightness that deviates from the fanfare-like main theme.(Lawson, Macdonald, 2018).[14]
Many scores often try to draw from worldly influence to create sound that cements itself into popular culture. An example of this is the score fromThe Good, The Bad, and The Ugly. In this score, composer Ennio Morricone uses a culmination of post-tonal music theory, Celtic song, gregorian chant, and mariachi trumpets to create the sound of the spaghetti western, one that is often associated with the wild west (Kalinak 2010).[15]

## Orchestration
Once the music is written, it must bearranged or orchestratedfor the ensemble that will perform it. The nature and level of orchestration varies from project to project and composer to composer, but in its basic form the orchestrator's job is to take thesingle-line musicwritten by the composer and "flesh it out" into instrument-specific sheet music for each member of the orchestra to perform.
Some composers, likeEnnio Morricone, orchestrate their own scores rather than use an orchestrator. Some composers give the orchestrator intricate details and copious notes that outline which instruments perform which notes—which limits the orchestrator's personal creative input to re-notating the music on different sheets of paper as appropriate. Other composers are less detailed, and often ask orchestrators to "fill in the blanks" to provide their own creative input in the makeup of the ensemble, ensuring that each instrument can perform the music as written, and even letting them introduce performance techniques and flourishes to enhance the score. In many cases, time constraints determined by the film's post-production schedule dictate whether composers orchestrate their own scores, as it is often impossible for the composer to complete all required tasks within the time allowed.
Over the years, several orchestrators have become linked to the work of one particular composer, often to the point where one does not work without the other.
Once the orchestration process has been completed, the sheet music is physically printed onto paper by one or moremusic copyistsand is ready for performance.

## Recording
When the music has been composed andorchestrated, the orchestra or ensemble then performs it, often with the composer conducting. Musicians for these ensembles are often uncredited in the film or on the album and are contracted individually (and if so, the orchestra contractor is credited in the film or the soundtrack album). However, some films have recently begun crediting the contracted musicians on the albums under the nameHollywood Studio Symphonyafter an agreement with theAmerican Federation of Musicians. Other performing ensembles that are often employed include theLondon Symphony Orchestra(performing film music since 1935)[16]theCity of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra(an orchestra dedicated mostly to recording), theBBC Philharmonic, and theNorthwest Sinfonia.[citation needed]
The orchestra performs in front of a large screen depicting the film, The conductor and musicians habitually wear headphones that sound a series of clicks called a "click-track" that changes withmeterand tempo, assisting to synchronize the music with the film.[17]
More rarely, the director talks to the composer before shooting has started, so as to give more time to the composer or because the director needs to shoot scenes (namely song or dance scenes) according to the final score. Sometimes the director has edited the film using "temp (temporary) music"—already published pieces with a character that the director believes to fit specific scenes.

## Elements of a film score
Most films have between 45 and 120 minutes of music. However, some films have very little or no music; others may feature a score that plays almost continuously throughout.

## Temp tracks
In some instances, film composers have been asked by the director to imitate a specific composer or style present in the temp track.[18]On other occasions, directors have become so attached to the temp score that they decide to use it and reject the original score written by the film composer. One of the most famous cases isStanley Kubrick's2001: A Space Odyssey, where Kubrick opted for existing recordings of classical works, including pieces by composerGyörgy Ligetirather than the score byAlex North,[19]though Kubrick had also hiredFrank Cordellto do a score. Other examples includeTorn Curtain(Bernard Herrmann),[20]Troy(Gabriel Yared),[21]Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl(Alan Silvestri),[22]Peter Jackson'sKing Kong(Howard Shore),[23]Air Force One(Randy Newman)[24]andThe Bourne Identity(Carter Burwell).[25]

## Structure
Films often have different themes for important characters, events, ideas or objects, an idea often associated withWagner's use ofleitmotif.[26]These may be played in different variations depending on the situation they represent, scattered amongst incidental music. The themes for specific characters or locations are known as a motif where the rest of the track is usually centered around the particular motif and the track develops in line with the motif.
This common technique may often pass unnoticed by casual moviegoers, but has become well known among genre enthusiasts. One prominent example isJohn Williams' score for theStar Warssaga, and the numerous themes inStar Warsmusicassociated with individual characters such asDarth Vader,Luke Skywalker, andPrincess Leia.[27]Similarly, themusic of theLord of the Ringsfilm seriesfeatured recurring themes for many main characters and places. Another notable example isJerry Goldsmith'sKlingontheme fromStar Trek: The Motion Picture(1979), which later composers in theStar Trekfilm seriesquoted in their Klingon motifs, and which was included on numerous occasions as a theme forWorf, the franchise's most prominent Klingon character.[28]Michael Giacchinoemployed character themes in the soundtrack for the 2009 animated filmUp, for which he received the Academy Award for Best Score. His orchestral soundtrack for the television seriesLostalso depended heavily on character and situation-specific themes.

## Source music
"Source music" (or a "source cue") comes from an on screen source that can actually be seen or that can be inferred (in academicfilm theorysuch music is called "diegetic" music, as it emanates from the "diegesis" or "story world"). An example of "source music" is the use of theFrankie Vallisong "Can't Take My Eyes Off You" inMichael Cimino'sThe Deer Hunter.Alfred Hitchcock's 1963 thrillerThe Birdsis an example of a Hollywood film with nonon-diegeticmusic whatsoever.Dogme 95is a filmmaking movement, started in Denmark in 1995, with a manifesto that prohibits any use of non-diegetic music in its films.

## Music criticism
The artistic merits of film music are frequently debated. Some critics value it highly, pointing to music such as that written byErich Wolfgang Korngold,Aaron Copland,Bernard Herrmann, and others. Some consider film music a defining genre of classical music in the late 20th century, if only because it is the brand of classical music heard more often than any other. In some cases, film themes have become accepted into the canon ofclassical music. These are mostly works from already noted composers who have done scores; for instance,Sergei Prokofiev's score toAlexander Nevsky, orVaughan Williams' score toScott of the Antarctic. Others see the great bulk of film music as meritless. They consider that much film music is derivative, borrowing heavily from previous works. Composers of film scores typically can produce about three or four per year. The most popular works by composers such asJohn Williamsare still far from entering the accepted classical canon, though there is a growing appreciation for the broader contribution of composers such as Williams among some classical composers and critics; for example, the Norwegian contemporary classical composerMarcus Paushas said that he considers Williams "...one of the great composers of any century," who has "found a very satisfying way of embodying dissonance and avant-garde techniques within a larger tonal framework," and who "might also have come the closest of any composer to realizing the old Schoenbergian utopia that children of the future would be whistling 12-tone rows."[29]Even so, considering they are often the most popular modern compositions of classical music known to the general public, major orchestras sometimes performconcerts of such music, as dopops orchestras.

## Preservation efforts
In 1983, a non-profit organization, theSociety for the Preservation of Film Music, was formed to preserve the "byproducts" of creating a film score, including the music manuscripts (written music) and other documents and studio recordings generated in the process of composing and recording scores that, in some instances, have been discarded bymovie studios.[30]The written music must be kept to perform the music on concert programs and to make new recordings of it. Sometimes only after decades has an archival recording of a film score been released on CD.

## History
The origins of film music are disputed, though they are generally considered to have aesthetic roots in various media forms associated with nineteenth-centuryRomanticism.[31]According toKurt London, film music "...began not as a result of any artistic urge, but from a dire need of something which would drown the noise made by the projector. For in those times there was as yet no sound-absorbent walls between the projection machine and the auditorium. This painful noise disturbed visual enjoyment to no small extent. Instinctively cinema proprietors had recourse to music, and it was the right way, using an agreeable sound to neutralize one less agreeable."[32]On the contrary, film historian James Wierzbicki asserts that early film showings (such as theLumière brothers' first film screening) would have been social events to the capacity that they had no need to mask the sounds of a projector mechanism. As these early films began to move out of exhibition spaces and intovaudevilletheaters, the role of film began to shift as well. Given that vaudeville theaters typically employed musicians, it is likely that this is the point when it became commonplace for accompany film with music. Audiences at the time would have come to expect music in the vaudeville space, and as such live musical accompaniment to films grew out naturally.[33]
Before the age of recorded sound in motion pictures, efforts were taken to provide suitable music for films, usually through the services of an in-house pianist or organist, and, in some cases, entire orchestras, typically givencue sheetsas a guide. A pianist was present to perform at theLumière brothers'first film screening in 1895.[34]In 1914,The Oz Film Manufacturing Companysent full-length scores byLouis F. Gottschalkfor their films.[35]Other examples of this includeVictor Herbert's score in 1915 toThe Fall of a Nation(a sequel toThe Birth of a Nation) andCamille Saint-Saëns' music forThe Assassination of the Duke of Guisein 1908. It was preceded byNathaniel D. Mann's score forThe Fairylogue and Radio-Playsby four months, but that was a mixture of interrelated stage and film performance in the tradition of oldmagic lanternshows.[36]Most accompaniments at this time, these examples notwithstanding, comprised pieces by famous composers, also including studies. These were often used to form catalogues ofphotoplay music, which had different subsections broken down by 'mood' and genre: dark, sad, suspense, action, chase, etc.
German cinema, which was highly influential in the era of silent movies, provided some original scores such asFritz Lang's moviesDie Nibelungen(1924) andMetropolis(1927), which were accompanied by original full scale orchestral and leitmotific scores written byGottfried Huppertz, who also wrote piano-versions of his music, for playing in smaller cinemas.[citation needed]Friedrich W. Murnau's moviesNosferatu(1922 – music byHans Erdmann) andFaust – Eine deutsche Volkssage(1926 – music byWerner Richard Heymann) also had original scores written for them. Other films like Murnau'sDer letzte Manncontained a mixing of original compositions (in this case byGiuseppe Becce) and library music / folk tunes, which were artistically included into the score by the composer. Much of this influence traces further back toGerman Romanticforms of music.Richard Wagner's ideas onGesamtkunstwerkandleitmotifin his operas were later picked up on by prominent film composerMax Steiner. Steiner and his contemporaryErich Korngoldboth immigrated from Vienna, bringing with them musical structures and ideologies of the late Romantic period.[37]
In France, before the advent of talkies,Erik Satiecomposed what many consider the first "frame by frame" synchronous film score for directorRené Clair's avant-garde shortEntr'acte(1924).[38][39]Anticipating "spotting" techniques and the inconsistencies of projection speeds in screenings of silent films, Satie took precise timings for each sequence and created a flexible,aleatoricscore of brief, evocative motifs repeated and varied in tempo as required.[40]American composersVirgil ThomsonandAaron Coplandcited Satie's music forEntr'acteas a major influence on their own forays into film scoring.[41]
When sound came to movies, director Fritz Lang barely used music in his movies anymore. Apart fromPeter Lorrewhistling a short piece from Edvard Grieg'sPeer Gynt, Lang's movieM – Eine Stadt sucht einen Mörderwas lacking musical accompaniment completely andDas Testament des Dr. Mabuseonly included one original piece written for the movie by Hans Erdmann played at the very beginning and end of the movie. One of the rare occasions when music occurs in the movie is a song one of the characters sings, that Lang uses to put emphasis on the man's insanity, similar to the use of the whistling inM.
Early attempts at the synchronization of sound and image were failures, in large part due to mechanical and technological limitations.Phonographs, the only medium available for recorded sound in the early twentieth century, were difficult if not impossible to synchronize with the rotation of film projectors. In the cases where an attempt was made, sound was further limited by an inability to properly amplify it. However, in the 1920s improvements in radio technology allowed for the amplification of sound, and the invention of sound on film allowed for the synchronization thereof.[42]A landmark event in music synchronization with the action in film was achieved in the score composed byMax SteinerforDavid O. Selznick's 1933King Kong.A fine example of this is when the aborigine chief slowly approaches the unwanted visitors to Skull Island who are filming the natives' sacred rites. As he strides closer and closer, each footfall is reinforced by a background chord.
Though "the scoring of narrative features during the 1940s lagged decades behind technical innovations in the field of concert music,"[43]the 1950s saw the rise of themodernistfilm score. DirectorElia Kazanwas open to the idea of jazz influences and dissonant scoring and worked with Alex North, whose score forA Streetcar Named Desire(1951) combined dissonance with elements of blues and jazz. Kazan also approachedLeonard Bernsteinto scoreOn the Waterfront(1954) and the result was reminiscent of earlier works byAaron CoplandandIgor Stravinskywith its "jazz-based harmonies and exciting additive rhythms."[43]A year later,Leonard Rosenman, inspired byArnold Schoenberg, experimented with atonality in his scores forEast of Eden(1955) andRebel Without a Cause(1955). In his ten-year collaboration withAlfred Hitchcock,Bernard Herrmannexperimented with ideas inVertigo(1958) andPsycho(1960). The use of non-diegetic jazz was another modernist innovation, such as jazz starDuke Ellington's score forOtto Preminger'sAnatomy of a Murder(1959).

## Box office champions
The following list includes all composers who have scored one of the 100 highest-grossing films of all time but have never been nominated for a major award (Oscar, Golden Globe etc.).
[44]

## Relation with directors
Sometimes, a composer may unite with a director by composing the score for many films of a same director.John Williams' professional relationship withSteven SpielbergandGeorge Lucasis one of the most prominent in film history, with Williams scoring all but five of Spielberg's films, and all the installments of both of Lucas' blockbuster franchises (Star WarsandIndiana Jones); Williams won all five of his Oscars in his collaborations with the two. Additionally,Danny Elfmandid the score for all the movies directed byTim Burton, with the exception ofEd Wood(score byHoward Shore) andSweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street(score byStephen Sondheim).

## Production music
Many companies provide music to various film, TV and commercial projects for a fee. Sometimes called library music, the music is owned by production music libraries and licensed to customers for use in film, television, radio and other media. Examples of firms include Warner Chappell Production Music, Jingle Punks, Associated Production Music, FirstCom Music, VideoHelper and Extreme Music. Unlike popular and classical music publishers, who typically own less than 50 percent of the copyright in a composition, music production libraries own all of the copyrights of their music, meaning that it can be licensed without seeking the composer's permission, as is necessary in licensing music from normal publishers. This is because virtually all music created for music libraries is done on awork for hirebasis.[citation needed]Production music is therefore a convenient medium for media producers – they know they can license any piece of music in the library at a reasonable rate.
Production music libraries typically offer a broad range of musical styles and genres, enabling producers and editors to find much of what they need in the same library. Music libraries vary in size from a few hundred tracks up to many thousands. The first production music library was set up byDe Wolfe Musicin 1927 with the advent of sound in film, the company originally scored music for use in silent film.[45]Another music library was set up by Ralph Hawkes of Boosey & Hawkes Music Publishers in the 1930s.[46]APM, the largest US library, has over 250,000 tracks.[47]