## Food and Agriculture Organization
TheFood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations[note 1](FAO) is aspecialized agencyof theUnited Nationsthat leads international efforts to defeathungerand improve nutrition andfood security. ItsLatinmotto,fiat panis, translates to "let there be bread". It was founded on 16 October 1945 inQuebec City, Canada.[2]
The FAO comprises 195 members, including 194 countries and theEuropean Union(EU). Its headquarters is inRome, Italy, and it maintains regional and field offices worldwide, operating in over 130 countries.[3]It helps governments and development agencies coordinate their activities to improve and develop agriculture,forestry,fisheries, and land andwater resources. It also conducts research, provides technical assistance to projects, operates educational and training programs, and collects agricultural output, production, and development data.[3]
The FAO is governed by a biennial conference representing each member country and the EU, which elects a 49-member executive council.[4]The director-general, as of 2019Qu Dongyuof China, serves as the chief administrative officer.[5]Various committees govern matters such as finance, programs, agriculture, and fisheries.[6]

## History
The idea of an internationalorganizationfor food and agriculture emerged in the late 19th and early 20th century, advanced primarily by Polish-born American agriculturalist and activistDavid Lubin. In May–June 1905, an international conference was held inRome, Italy, which led to the creation of theInternational Institute of Agriculture(IIA) by theKing of Italy,Victor Emmanuel III.[7]
The IIA was the first intergovernmental organization to deal with the problems and challenges of agriculture on a global scale. It worked primarily to collect, compile, and publish data on agriculture, ranging from output statistics to a catalog of crop diseases. Among its achievements was the publication of the first agricultural census in 1930.[8]
World War IIeffectively ended the IIA. During the war, in 1943, United States presidentFranklin D. Rooseveltcalled a League of Nations Conference on Food and Agriculture, which brought representatives from forty-four governments toThe Omni Homestead ResortinHot Springs, Virginia, from 18 May to 3 June to attend theHot Springs Conference. The main impetus for the conference was the British-born Australian economistFrank L. McDougall, who since 1935 had advocated for an international forum to address hunger andmalnutrition.[9]
The Conference ended with a commitment to establish a permanent organization for food and agriculture, which was achieved on 16 October 1945 inQuebec City, Canada, following the Constitution of the Food and Agriculture Organization.[10]The first session of the FAO Conference began the same day in theChâteau Frontenacin Quebec City and ended on 1 November 1945.[11]This was led by Sir John Boyd Orr where his work on ending world hunger and creation of FAO resulted in him winning the Nobel Peace Prize in 1949.[12]
After the war, the IIA was officially dissolved by resolution of its Permanent Committee on 27 February 1948. Its functions, facilities, and mandate were then transferred to the newly established FAO, which maintained its headquarters in Rome.[13]
The FAO's initial functions supported agricultural and nutrition research and provided technical assistance to member countries to boost production in agriculture, fishery, and forestry.[14]Beginning in the 1960s, it focused on efforts to develop high-yield strains of grain, eliminate protein deficiency, promote rural employment, and increase agricultural exports. The FAO recognized the decrease of these resources as an urgent problem in 1961 and created a joint collaboration with the International Biological Program (IBP) in 1967.[15]To that end, it joined theUN General Assemblyin creating the UNWorld Food Programme, the largest humanitarian organization addressing hunger and promoting food security.
The FAO launched what would become the FAO Money and Medals Programme (MMP) in 1968. FAO issued collector art medals in various series to bring attention to FAO's goals and missions. This program was responsible for over a hundred medal designs issued to the collecting public. A thirtieth anniversary medal of the MMP was issued in 1998.
In 1974, in response to famine in Africa, the FAO convened the first World Food Summit to address widespread hunger, malnutrition, and food insecurity.[16]The meeting resulted in a proclamation that "every man, woman, and child has the inalienable right to be free from hunger and malnutrition to develop their physical and mental faculties" and a global commitment to eradicate these issues within a decade. A subsequent summit in 1996 addressed the shortcomings in achieving this goal while establishing a strategic plan for eliminating hunger and malnutrition into the 21st century.[16]
Every year, FAO publishes a number of major 'State of the World' reports related to food, agriculture, forestry, fisheries and natural resources.[17]

## Structure and finance
In 1951, the FAO's headquarters were moved from Washington, D.C., United States, toRome, Italy. The agency is directed by the Conference of Member Nations, which meets every two years to review the work carried out by the organization and to Work and Budget for the next two-year period. The conference elects a council of 49 member states (serve three-year rotating terms) that acts as an interim governing body, and the director-general, who heads the agency.
The FAO is composed of eight departments: Agriculture and Consumer Protection,Climate,Biodiversity, Land and Water Department, Economic and Social Development,FisheriesandAquaculture,Forestry, Corporate Services and Technical Cooperation and Programme Management.[18]
Beginning in 1994, the FAO underwent the most significant restructuring since its founding, to decentralize operations, streamline procedures and reduce costs. As a result, savings of about US$50 million, €43 million a year were realized.[19]

## Budget
The FAO's Regular Programme budget is funded by its members through contributions set at the FAO Conference. This budget covers core technical work, cooperation and partnerships including the Technical Cooperation Programme, knowledge exchange, policy and advocacy, direction and administration, governance and security.
The total FAO Budget planned for 2018–2019 is US$1,005.6 million.[20]The voluntary contributions provided by members and other partners support mechanical and emergency (including rehabilitation) assistance to governments for clearly defined purposes linked to the results framework, as well as direct support to FAO's core work. The voluntary contributions are expected to reach approximately US$1.6billionin 2016–2017.
This overall budget covers core technical work, cooperation and partnerships, leading to Food and Agriculture Outcomes at 71 percent; Core Functions at 11 percent; the Country Office Network – 5 percent; Capital and Security Expenditure – 2 percent; Administration – 6 percent; and Technical and Cooperation Program – 5 percent.

## FAO Headquarters
Theworld headquartersis located inRome, in the former seat of the Department ofItalian East Africa. One of the most notable features of the building was theAxum Obeliskwhich stood in front of the agency seat, although just outside the territory allocated to the FAO by theItalian Government. It was taken fromEthiopiabyBenito Mussolini's troops in 1937 as war booty and returned on 18 April 2005.

## Partnership and Liaison Offices
Partnership and Liaison Offices provide for stronger country participation in the FAO's work and programmes at national, sub-regional, regional, and inter-regional levels, and enhanced cooperation through unilateral trust fund projects andSouth–South cooperation.

## Priority work areas
FAO has outlined the following priorities in its fight against hunger.[25]
Two fundamental areas of work – gender and governance – are fully integrated in the above strategic objective action plans.

## Codex Alimentarius
FAO and the World Health Organization created theCodex Alimentarius Commissionin 1961 to develop food standards, guidelines, and texts such as codes of practice under the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme. The programme's main aims are protecting consumer health, ensuring fair trade, and promoting co-ordination of all food standards work undertaken by intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.

## World Food Summit
In 1996, FAO organized theWorld Food Summit, attended by 112 Heads or Deputy Heads of State and Government. The Summit concluded with the signing of theRome Declaration, which established the goal of halving the number of people who suffer from hunger by 2015.[26]At the same time, 1,200 civil society organizations (CSOs) from 80 countries participated in an NGO forum. The forum was critical of the growing industrialization of agriculture and called upon governments – and FAO – to do more to protect the 'Right to Food' for the poor.[27]

## TeleFood
In 1997, FAO launched TeleFood, a campaign of concerts, sporting events, and other activities to harness the power of media, celebrities, and concerned citizens to help fight hunger. Since its start, the campaign has generated close to US$28 million, €15 million in donations. Money raised through TeleFood pays for small, sustainable projects that help small-scale farmers produce more food for their families and communities.[28]
The projects provide tangible resources, such as fishing equipment, seeds, and agricultural implements. They vary enormously, from helping families raise pigs in Venezuela through creating school gardens in Cape Verde and Mauritania or providing school lunches in Uganda and teaching children to grow food to raising fish in a leper community in India.

## FAO Goodwill Ambassadors
TheFAO Goodwill AmbassadorsProgramme was initiated in 1999. It was created to increase public awareness and disseminate information about issues related to food security and hunger in the world.

## Right to Food Guidelines
In 2004 theRight to Food Guidelineswere adopted which offer guidance to states on how to implement their obligations on theright to food.[29]

## Response to food crisis
In December 2007, FAO launched its Initiative on soaring food prices to help small producers raise their output and earn more. Under the initiative, FAO contributed to the work of the UN High-Level Task Force on the Global Food Crisis, which produced the Comprehensive Framework for Action. FAO has carried out projects in over 25 countries and inter-agency missions in nearly 60, scaled up its monitoring through the Global Information and Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture, provided policy advice to governments while supporting their efforts to increase food production, and advocated for more investment in agriculture as well as provided funding to distribute and multiply quality seeds in Haiti,[30]which has significantly increased food production, thereby providing cheaper food.

## FAO–EU partnership
In May 2009, FAO and the European Union signed an initial aid package worth €125 million to support small farmers in countries hit hard by rising food prices. The aid package falls under the EU's €1 billion Food Facility, set up with theUN Secretary-General's High-Level Task Force on the Global Food Crisis and FAO to focus on programmes that will have a quick but lasting impact on food security.[31]FAO is receiving around €200 million for work in 25 countries, of which €15.4 million goes to Zimbabwe.[32]

## Food security programmes
The Special Programme for Food Security is FAO's flagship initiative for reaching the goal of halving the number of hungry in the world by 2015 (currently estimated at close to 1 billion people) as part of its commitment to theMillennium Development Goals. Through projects in over 100 countries worldwide, the programme promotes effective, tangible solutions to eliminating hunger, undernourishment, and poverty. Currently, 102 countries are engaged in the programme, and of these, approximately 30 have begun shifting from pilot to national programmes. To maximize the impact of its work, FAO strongly promotes national ownership and local empowerment in the countries in which it operates.[33]

## Online campaign against hunger
The 1billionhungry project became the EndingHunger campaign in April 2011. Spearheaded by FAO in partnership with other UN agencies and private nonprofit groups, the EndingHunger movement pushes the boundaries of conventional public advocacy. It builds on the success in 2010 of The 1billonhungry project and the subsequent chain of public events that led to the collection of over three million signatures on a global petition to end hunger (www.EndingHunger.org). The petition was originally presented to representatives of world governments at a ceremony in Rome on 30 November 2010.[34]
The web and partnerships are two pivotal and dynamic aspects of EndingHunger. The campaign relies on the assistance of organizations and institutions that can facilitate the project's diffusion, by placing banners on their own websites or organizing events aimed to raise awareness of the project. In its 2011 season, the campaign expanded its multimedia content, pursued mutual visibility arrangements with partner organizations, and sharpened its focus on 14- to 25-year-olds, who were encouraged to understand their potential as a social movement to push for the end of hunger.
Moreover, the EndingHunger project is a viral communication campaign, renewing and expanding its efforts to build the movement through Facebook, Twitter and other social networks. Those who sign the petition can spread the link of the EndingHunger website to their friends, via social media or mail, in order to gain awareness and signatures for the petition. The next interim objective is to grow the EndingHunger movement's Facebook community to 1 million members. As with the petition, the more people who get involved, the more powerful the message to governments: "We are no longer willing to accept the fact that hundreds of millions live in chronic hunger."[35]Groups and individuals can also decide on their own to organize an event about the project, simply by gathering friends, whistles, T-shirts and banners (whistles and T-shirts can be ordered, and petition sign sheets downloaded, on the endinghunger.org website) and thereby alert people about chronic hunger by using the yellow whistle.
The original 1billionhungry campaign borrowed as its slogan the line "I'm as mad as hell, and I'm not going to take this anymore!", used byPeter Finchin the 1976 film,Network.[36]Meanwhile, the yellow whistle has been the campaign symbol from the start, from 1billionhungry to Ending Hunger. (The creative concept was provided by the McCann Erickson Italy Communication Agency.) It symbolizes the fact that we are "blowing the whistle" on the silent disaster of hunger. It is both a symbol and – at many live events taking place around the world – a physical means of expressing frustration and making some noise about the hunger situation.[37]
Both The 1billionhungry and the EndingHunger campaigns have continued to attractUN Goodwill Ambassadorsfrom the worlds of music and cinema, literature, sport, activism and government. Some of the well known individuals who have become involved include former Brazilian PresidentLuiz Inácio Lula da Silva, former presidents of ChileRicardo LagosandMichelle Bachelet, actressSusan Sarandon, actorsJeremy IronsandRaul Bova, singersCéline DionandAnggun, authorsIsabelle AllendeandAndrea Camilleri, musicianChucho Valdésand Olympic track-and-field legendCarl Lewis.[38]

## International Plant Protection Convention
FAO created theInternational Plant Protection Conventionor IPPC in 1952. This international treaty organization works to prevent the international spread of pests and plant diseases in both cultivated and wild plants. Among its functions are the maintenance of lists of plant pests, tracking of pest outbreaks, and coordination of technical assistance between member nations. As of July 2018, 183 contracting parties have ratified the treaty.

## Plant Treaty (ITPGRFA)
FAO is depositary of theInternational Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, also calledPlant Treaty,Seed TreatyorITPGRFA, entered into force on 29 June 2004.

## Alliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition
The Alliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition (AAHM)[39]aims to address how countries and organizations can be more effective in advocating and carrying out actions to address hunger and malnutrition. As a global partnership, AAHM creates global connections between local, regional, national and international institutions that share the goals of fighting hunger and malnutrition. The organization works to address food security by enhancing resources and knowledge sharing and strengthening hunger activities within countries and across state lines at the regional and international levels.
Following theWorld Food Summit, the Alliance was initially created in 2002 as the 'International Alliance Against Hunger (IAAH)' to strengthen and coordinate national efforts in the fight against hunger and malnutrition. The mission of the Alliance originates from the first and eighthUN Millennium Development Goals; reducing the number of people that suffer from hunger in half by 2015 (preceded by the "Rome Declaration" in 1996) and developing a global partnership for development. The Alliance was founded by the Rome-based food agencies – the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO),[40]UN World Food Programme(WFP),[41]International Fund for Agricultural Development(IFAD),[42]– andBioversity International.[43]
AAHM connects top-down and bottom-up anti-hunger development initiatives, linking governments, UN organizations, and NGOs together in order to increase effectiveness through unity.[44]

## Integrated pest management
During the 1990s, FAO took a leading role in the promotion ofintegrated pest managementfor rice production in Asia. Hundreds of thousands of farmers were trained using an approach known as theFarmer Field School(FFS).[45]Like many of the programmes managed by FAO, the funds for Farmer Field Schools came from bilateral Trust Funds, with Australia,Netherlands,NorwayandSwitzerlandacting as the leading donors. FAO's efforts in this area have drawn praise from NGOs that have otherwise criticized much of the work of the organization.

## Trans-boundary pests and diseases
FAO established anEmergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseasesin 1994, focusing on the control of diseases likerinderpest,foot-and-mouth diseaseandavian fluby helping governments coordinate their responses. One key element is theGlobal Rinderpest Eradication Programme, which has advanced to a stage where large tracts of Asia and Africa have now been free of the cattle disease rinderpest for an extended period of time. Meanwhile, theDesert Locust Information Servicemonitors the worldwide locust situation and keeps affected countries and donors informed of expected developments.[46]

## Global Partnership Initiative for Plant Breeding Capacity Building
The Global Partnership Initiative for Plant Breeding Capacity Building (GIPB) is a global partnership dedicated to increasing plant breeding capacity building.[47]The mission of GIPB is to enhance the capacity of developing countries to improve crops for food security and sustainable development through better plant breeding and delivery systems.[48]The ultimate goal is to ensure that a critical mass of plant breeders, leaders, managers and technicians, donors and partners are linked together through an effective global network.
Increasing capacity building for plant breeding in developing countries is critical for the achievement of meaningful results in poverty and hunger reduction and to reverse the current worrisome trends. Plant breeding is a well recognized science capable of widening the genetic and adaptability base of cropping systems, by combining conventional selection techniques and modern technologies. It is essential to face and prevent the recurrence of crises such as that
of the soaring food prices and to respond to the increasing demands for crop based sources of energy.

## Investment in agriculture
FAO's technical cooperation department hosts an Investment Centre that promotes greater investment in agriculture and rural development by helping developing countries identify and formulate sustainable agricultural policies, programmes and projects. It mobilizes funding from multilateral institutions such as the World Bank, regional development banks and international funds as well as FAO resources.[49]

## Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS)
The Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS) Partnership Initiative was conceptualized and presented by Parviz Koohafkan the Task Manager of Chapter 10 of Agenda 21 in Food and Agricultural Organization of United Nations, FAO in 2002 during World Summit on Sustainable Development inJohannesburg, South Africa.[50]This UN Partnership Initiative aims to identify, support and safeguard Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems and their livelihoods, agricultural and associated biodiversity, landscapes, knowledge systems and cultures around the world. The GIAHS Partnership recognizes the crucial importance of the well-being of family farming communities in an integrated approach while directing activities towards sustainable agriculture and rural development.

## Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA)
The Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, established in 1983, provides an intergovernmental forum that specifically addresses biological diversity for food and agriculture. Its main objective is to ensure the sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity for food and agriculture and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits derived from its use, for present and future generations.

## Animal Genetic Resources
FAO has a unit focused onAnimal Genetic Resources, which are defined as "those animal species that are used, or may be used, for the production of food and agriculture, and the populations within each of them. These populations within each species can be classified as wild and feral populations, land-races and primary populations, standardized breeds, selected lines, varieties, strains and any conserved genetic material; all of which are currently categorized as Breeds."[51]FAO assists countries in implementation of theGlobal Plan of Action for Animal Genetic Resources. FAO supports a variety ofex situandin situconservation strategies includingcryoconservation of animal genetic resources.

## Forestry
One of FAO's strategic goals is the sustainable management of the world's forests. TheForestry Division[52]works to balance social and environmental considerations with the economic needs of rural populations living in forest areas. FAO serves as a neutral forum for policy dialogue, as a reliable source of information on forests and trees and as a provider of expert technical assistance and advice to help countries develop and implement effective national forest programmes.
FAO is both a global clearinghouse for information on forests and forest resources and a facilitator that helps building countries' local capacity to provide their own national forest data. In collaboration with member countries, FAO carries out periodic global assessments of forest resources, which are made available through reports, publications and the FAO's Web site.[53]TheGlobal Forest Resources Assessment[54]provides comprehensive reporting on forests worldwide every five years. FRA 2020 is the most recent global assessment. The results, data and analyses are available online in different formats, including key findings, main report and country reports.[55]
Every two years, FAO publishes theState of the World's Forests,[56]a major report covering current and emerging issues facing the forestry sector.
Since 1947, FAO has published the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products,[57]a compilation of statistical data on basic forest products from over 100 countries and territories of the world. It contains data on the volume of production; and the volume, value and direction of trade in forest products.
Unasylva,[58]FAO's peer-reviewed journal on forestry, has been published in English, French and Spanish on a regular basis since 1947, the longest-running multilingual forestry journal in the world.
The FAO is an official sponsor ofInternational Day of Forests, on 21 March each year, as proclaimed by theUnited Nations General Assemblyon 28 November 2012.[59]
Every six years since 1926, FAO and a host member state hold theWorld Forestry Congress. It is a forum for the sharing of knowledge and experience regarding the conservation, management and use of the world's forests, and covers such issues as international dialogue, socio-economic and institutional aspects, and forest policies.
The Forestry Department is also organized geographically in several groups covering the whole world's forest ecosystems. One of them is the Silva Mediterranean work-group, covering the pan-Mediterranean region.

## Tree Cities of the World
At the World Forum on Urban Forests in October 2018, the FAO and theArbor Day Foundationjointly launched theTree Cities of the Worldprogramme. The aim of this programme is to celebrate and recognize cities and towns of all sizes throughout the world which have shown a commitment to maintaining theirurban forests.[60]From the end of 2019, any municipality which has responsibility for its trees was able to apply to join Tree Cities of the World.[61]On 4 February 2020, 59 cities were announced as having achieved the designation of Tree City of the World. There were 27 in the United States, with the rest scattered across the world.[62][63]

## Fisheries
The FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department is defined through its vision and mission statements:
The work of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Department centers on the "Sustainable management and use of fisheries and aquaculture resource", embracing normative as well as operational activities, whether implemented from headquarters or from the field.[65]
The FAOCode of Conduct for Responsible Fisherieswas adopted in 1995.[66]

## Statistics
ESSGis anacronymfor theGlobal Statistics Service, the major "section" of the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization - Statistics Division. It is responsible for updating and disseminating the FAOSTAT report.[67][68]This offers free and easy access to data for 245 countries and 35 regional areas from 1961 through the most recent year available. Enhanced features include browsing and analysis of data, an advanced interactive data download, and enhanced data exchange through web services.
The Land and Water Division maintains a database of global water statistics, Aquastat.[69]The Fisheries and Aquaculture Division maintains a database of global Fisheries and Aquaculture statistics, FishStat.[70]

## Membership
As of 1 May 2020, the Organization has 194 Member Nations, one Member Organization, and two Associate Members.
Taiwan (at the time representing China), withdrew from the FAO in 1951.[71]in 1971, thePeople's Republic of Chinawas recognized as the representative   of China  by the FAO and the withdrawal from part of Taiwan was not taken into account.[71]
The onlyUN member statethat is a non-member of the FAO isLiechtenstein.[72][73]
BothUN observer statesare also non-members of the FAO: theHoly See(Vatican City) andPalestine.
Some countries may denote specific representatives to the FAO, for instance theUnited States Ambassador to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, who has ambassador rank and is also a part of theUnited States Mission to the UN Agencies in Rome.

## 1970s, 80s, 90s
There has been public criticism of FAO for at least 30 years. Dissatisfaction with the organization's performance was among the reasons for the creation of two new organizations after the World Food Conference in 1974, namely theWorld Food Counciland theInternational Fund for Agricultural Development; by the early eighties there was intense rivalry among these organizations.[74]At the same time, theWorld Food Programme, which started as an experimental three-year programme under FAO, was growing in size and independence, with the Directors of FAO and WFP struggling for power.[75]
Early in 1989, the organization came under attack fromHeritage Foundation, an American conservativethink tank, which described the FAO as becoming "essentially irrelevant in combating hunger" due to a "bloated bureaucracy known for the mediocrity of its work and the inefficiency of its staff", which had become politicized.[76]In September of the same year, the journalSocietypublished a series of articles about FAO[77]that included a contribution from the Heritage Foundation and a response by FAO staff member, Richard Lydiker, who was later described by the Danish Minister for Agriculture (who had herself resigned from the organization) as "FAO's chief spokesman for non-transparency".[78]
In 1990, the U.S. State Department expressed the view that "The Food and Agriculture Organization has lagged behind other UN organizations in responding to US desires for improvements in program and budget processes to enhance value for money spent".[79]
A year later, in 1991,The Ecologistmagazine produced a special issue under the heading "The UN Food and Agriculture Organization: Promoting World Hunger".[80]The magazine included articles that questioned FAO's policies and practices in forestry,fisheries,aquaculture, andpest control. The articles were written by experts such asHelena Norberg-Hodge,Vandana Shiva,Edward Goldsmith,Miguel A. AltieriandBarbara Dinham.

## 2000s
The 2002 Food Summit organized by FAO was considered to have been ineffectual and unproductive by the official participants.[81]Social movements, farmers, fisherfolk, pastoralists, indigenous peoples, environmentalists, women's organizations, trade unions and NGOs expressed their "collective disappointment in, and rejection of the official Declaration of the ... Summit".[82]
In 2004, FAO produced a controversial report called "Agricultural Biotechnology: meeting the needs of the poor?", which claimed that "agriculturalbiotechnologyhas real potential as a new tool in the war on hunger".[83]In response to the report, more than 650 organizations from around the world signed an open letter in which they said "FAO has broken its commitment to civil society and peasants' organisations". The letter complained that organizations representing the interests of farmers had not been consulted, that FAO was siding with the biotechnology industry and, consequently, that the report "raises serious questions about the independence and intellectual integrity of an important United Nations agency".[84]Jacques Diouf, the Director General of FAO at that time, responded immediately, stating that decisions on biotechnology must "be taken at the international level by competent bodies" (in other words, not by non-governmental organizations). He acknowledged, however, that "biotechnology research is essentially driven by the world's top tentransnational corporations" and "the private sector protects its results withpatentsin order to earn from its investment and it concentrates on products that have no relevance to food in developing countries".[85]
In May 2006, a British newspaper published the resignation letter ofLouise Fresco, one of eight Assistant Directors-General of FAO. In her letter, Fresco stated that "the Organization has been unable to adapt to a new era", that its "contribution and reputation have declined steadily" and "its leadership has not proposed bold options to overcome this crisis".[86]
The 32nd Session of FAO's Committee on World Food Security in 2006, attended by 120 countries, was widely criticized by non-governmental organizations, but largely ignored by the mainstream media.Oxfamcalled for an end to the talk-fests[87]whileVia Campesinaissued a statement that criticised FAO's policy of Food Security.[88]
On 18 October 2007, the final report of an Independent External Evaluation of FAO was published. More than 400 pages in length, the evaluation was the first of its kind in the history of the Organization. It had been commissioned by decision of the 33rd Session of the FAO Conference in November 2005. The report concluded that "The Organization is today in a financial and programme crisis" but "the problems affecting the Organization today can all be solved".[89]Among the problems noted by the IEE were: "The Organization has been conservative and slow to adapt"; "FAO currently has a heavy and costly bureaucracy", and "The capacity of the Organization is declining and many of its core competencies are now imperilled". Among the solutions offered were: "A new Strategic Framework", "institutional culture change and reform of administrative and management systems". In conclusion the IEE stated that, "If FAO did not exist it would need to be invented".
The official response from FAO came on 29 October 2007. It indicated that management supported the principal conclusion in the report of the IEE on the need for "reform with growth" so as to have an FAO "fit for this century".[90]Meanwhile, hundreds of FAO staff signed a petition in support of the IEE recommendations, calling for "a radical shift in management culture and spirit, depoliticization of appointments, restoration of trust between staff and management, [and] setting strategic priorities of the organization".[91]
In May 2008, while talking about the ongoingworld food crisis, PresidentAbdoulaye WadeofSenegalexpressed the opinion that FAO was "a waste of money" and that "we must scrap it". Wade said that FAO was itself largely to blame for the price rises, and that the organization's work was duplicated by other bodies that operated more efficiently, like the UN'sInternational Fund for Agricultural Development.[92]However, this criticism may have had more to do with personal animosity between the President and the Director-General, himself a Senegalese, particularly in light of the significant differences in the work carried out by the two organizations.
In June 2008, the FAO sponsored theHigh-Level Conference on World Food Security. The summit was notable for the lack of agreement over the issue ofbiofuels.[93]The response to the summit among non-governmental organizations was mixed, withOxfamstating that "the summit in Rome was an important first step in tackling the food crisis but greater action is now needed",[94]while Maryam Rahmanian of Iran's Centre for Sustainable Development said "We are dismayed and disgusted to see the food crisis used to further the policies that have led us to the food crisis in the first place".[95]As with previous food summits, civil society organizations held a parallel meeting and issued their own declaration to "reject the corporate industrial and energy-intensive model of production and consumption that is the basis of continuing crises."[96]
In November 2008, a Special Conference of FAO member countries agreed a US$42.6 million (€38.6 million), three-year Immediate Plan of Action for "reform with growth", as recommended by the IEE. Under the plan US$21.8 million would be spent on overhauling the financial procedures, hierarchies and human resources management.[97]

## 2010s
From 2013, an English-language newspaper based in Rome,The Italian Insider, made several allegations of nepotism and corruption within FAO and reported on poor management-staff relations. In June 2018, FAO and four of its officials took the paper and its editor, John Philips, to court alleging defamation, using a law dating back to thefascist erain Italy.[98]Reporters Without Borderscondemned "the disproportionate nature of the defamation proceedings", for which the newspaper was liable for a fine of up to Euros 100,000 and the editor at least three years in prison.[99]The case was adjourned until January 2019, when it was further adjourned until May 2019. The January hearing was considered by the British satirical magazinePrivate Eyeto have been "one of the more surreal courtroom scenes in modern times", involving dispute as to the meaning of an English slang word used by theInsider.[100]
In 2016/17 FAO was heavily criticized for recruitingNadine HerediaAlarcón de Humala, wife of the former president of Peru,Ollanta Humala, to a senior position, at a time when she was being investigated by Peru following corruption allegations.[101][102]Critics includedTransparency International.[103]
At the end of April 2017, FAO staff unions addressed the organization's Governing Council to complain about the practice of issuing short-term contracts that "exploit employees without providing job security, social security and paid leave". Other complaints included the increasing centralization of management processes, despite claims that FAO was being decentralized, and the failure to follow United Nations recommendations regarding increasing the retirement age. The staff representative also complained about the high percentage of unfilled positions, increasing the workload for others who were under pressure to deliver more with less. She also noted that contacts between Management and the staff bodies were becoming less and less frequent.[104]

## 2020s
An investigation by the German public broadcaster ARD shows that the Chinese leadership of the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation FAO has tailored it to Chinese interests sinceQu Dongyutook office in 2019. According to the report, the acting director-general has instrumentalized the FAO in Beijing's interests: It is about deliveries ofpesticidesbanned in Europe, the majority of which come from the Chinese agrochemical companySyngenta, UN projects in line with China's "Belt and Road Initiative" as well as questionable investment projects.[105][106]

## FAO renewal
The FAO Conference in November 2007 unanimously welcomed the IEE report and established a Conference Committee for the Follow-up to the Independent External Evaluation of FAO (CoC-IEE) to be chaired by the Independent Chairperson of Council, and open to full participation by all Members. The CoC-IEE was charged to review the IEE report and its recommendations and develop an Immediate Plan of Action (IPA) for their implementation.[107]
A comprehensive programme of organizational reform and culture change began in 2008 after the release of an Independent External Evaluation. Headquarters restructuring and delegation of decision making created a flatter more responsive structure and reduced costs. Modernizing and streamlining of administrative and operational processes took place. Improved internal teamwork and closer external partnerships coupled with upgrading of IT infrastructure and greater autonomy of FAO's decentralized offices now allows the Organization to respond quickly where needs are greatest. As FAO is primarily a knowledge based organization, investing in human resources is a top priority. Capacity building including a leadership programme, employee rotation and a new junior professional programme were established. Individual performance management, an ethics and ombudsman officer and an independent office of evaluation were designed to improve performance through learning and strengthened oversight.
In January 2012, the Director-GeneralJosé Graziano da Silvaacted upon the commitment made during his campaign to bring the FAO reform to a successful and anticipated completion. In addition, the new Director-General shifted the focus of the reform process to realization of its benefits and mainstreaming the reform into the work of the Organization.[108]
In July 2020, the FAO Council approved a series of measures proposed by its Director-GeneralQu Dongyuto modernize the organization and make it more efficient and effective. An important element within the approved measures is the adoption "of a more flexible organizational structure, aimed at ensuring agility, optimal cross-sectoral collaboration and better responses to emerging needs and priorities".[109][110]