## Friedrich Nietzsche
Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche[b](15 October 1844 – 25 August 1900) was a German philosopher and writer who started his career as aclassical philologistand turned to philosophy early in his academic career. In 1869, at age 24, he was appointed Professor of Classical Philology at theUniversity of Basel. Plagued by health problems for most of his life, he resigned from the university in 1879. He afterward lived as an independent writer, spending much of his life in relative solitude and financial insecurity while moving between Switzerland, Italy, and southern France in search of climates that might alleviate his condition, and in the following decade, he completed much of hiscore writing. In 1889, aged 44, he suffered a mental breakdown and thereafter a complete loss of his mental faculties, withparalysisandvascular dementia,[c]living his remaining 11 years under the care of his family until his death.His worksandhis philosophyhave fostered not only extensive scholarship but also much popular interest.
Nietzsche's work encompasses poetry,cultural criticism, andphilosophical essayswhile displaying a fondness foraphorismsandirony. Prominent elements of his philosophy include his critique ofobjective truthin favour ofperspectivism; agenealogicalcritique ofChristian moralityand a related theory ofmaster–slave morality; theaffirmation of lifein response to both theweakening of religion ("God is dead")[14]and the crisis ofpassive nihilismwhich followed it; the notion ofApollonian and Dionysianduality; and a characterisation of the humansubjectas the expression of competingwills, collectively understood as thewill-to-power. His later work developed influential concepts such as theÜbermensch, thetransvaluation of values, and his unique formulation ofeternal return. His body of work touched a wide range of topics, includingaesthetic,philology,history,music,religion,tragedy,cultureandscience, and drew inspiration from such diverse sources asGreek tragedy,Arthur Schopenhauer,Ralph Waldo Emerson, andRichard Wagner.
After Nietzsche's death, his sister,Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche, became the curator and editor of his manuscripts. She edited his unpublished writings to fit herGerman ultranationalistideology, often contradicting or obfuscating Nietzsche's stated opinions, whichwere explicitly opposed to antisemitism and nationalism.[citation needed]Through her published editions, Nietzsche's work became associated withfascismandNazism. Twentieth-century scholars such asWalter Kaufmann,R. J. HollingdaleandGeorges Batailledefended Nietzsche against this interpretation, and corrected editions of his writings were soon made available. The works of Nietzsche then achieved renewed popularity in the 1960s and his ideas have since had a widespread impact on 20th- and 21st-century thinkers across philosophy—especially in schools ofcontinental philosophysuch asexistentialism,postmodernismandpost-structuralism—as well as art, literature, music, poetry, politics andpopular culture.

## Youth (1844–1868)
Born on 15 October 1844, Nietzsche[15]grew up in the town ofRöcken(now part ofLützen), nearLeipzig, in the PrussianProvince of Saxony. He was named after KingFriedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia, who turned 49 on the day of Nietzsche's birth (Nietzsche later dropped his middle name, Wilhelm). Nietzsche's great-grandfather,Gotthelf Engelbert Nietzsche[ja](1714–1804), was an inspector and a philosopher. Nietzsche's grandfather,Friedrich August Ludwig Nietzsche[de](1756–1826), was a theologian.[16]Nietzsche's parents,Carl Ludwig Nietzsche(1813–1849), aLutheranpastor[17]and former teacher; andFranziska Nietzsche[de](néeOehler) (1826–1897), married in 1843, the year before Friedrich's birth. They had two other children: a daughter,Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche, born in 1846; and a second son, Ludwig Joseph, born in 1848. Nietzsche's father died of a brain disease in 1849, after a year of excruciating agony, when the boy was only four years old; Ludwig Joseph died six months later at age two.[18]The family then moved toNaumburg, where they lived with Nietzsche's maternal grandmother and his father's two unmarried sisters. After the death of Nietzsche's grandmother in 1856, the family moved into their own house, nowNietzsche-Haus, a museum, and Nietzsche study centre.
Nietzsche attended a boys' school and then a private school, where he became friends with Gustav Krug and Wilhelm Pinder, both of whom came from highly respected families. Academic records from one of the schools attended by Nietzsche noted that he excelled inChristian theology.[19]
In 1854 he began to attend the Gymnasium in Naumburg. Because his father had worked for the state (as a pastor), the now-fatherless Nietzsche was offered a scholarship to study atSchulpforta. That Nietzsche was admitted on the strength of his academic competence has been debunked: his grades were not near the top of the class.[20]He studied there from 1858 to 1864, becoming friends withPaul Deussenand Carl von Gersdorff (1844–1904), who later became a jurist. He also found time to work on poems and musical compositions. Nietzsche led "Germania", a music and literature club, during his summers in Naumburg.[18]At Schulpforta, Nietzsche received an important grounding in languages—Greek,Latin,Hebrew, and French—to be able to read importantprimary sources;[21]he also experienced for the first time being away from his family life in a small-town conservative environment. His end-of-semester exams in March 1864showed a 1in Religion and German; a 2a in Greek and Latin; a 2b in French, History, and Physics; and a "lackluster" 3in Hebrew and Mathematics.[22]
Nietzsche was an amateur composer.[23]He composed several works for voice, piano, and violin beginning in 1858 at the Schulpforta in Naumburg when he started to work on musical compositions.Richard Wagnerwas dismissive of Nietzsche's music, allegedly mocking a birthday gift of a piano composition sent by Nietzsche in 1871 to Wagner's wifeCosima. German conductor and pianistHans von Bülowalso described another of Nietzsche's pieces as "the most undelightful and the most anti-musical draft on musical paper that I have faced in a long time".[24]
While at Schulpforta Nietzsche pursued subjects that were considered unbecoming. He became acquainted with the work of the then-almost-unknown poetFriedrich Hölderlin, calling him "my favourite poet" and writing an essay in which he said that the poet raised consciousness to "the most sublime ideality".[25]The teacher who corrected the essay gave it a good mark but commented that Nietzsche should concern himself in the future with healthier, more lucid, and more "German" writers. Additionally, he became acquainted withErnst Ortlepp, an eccentric,blasphemous, and oftendrunkenpoet who was found dead in a ditch weeks after meeting Nietzsche but who may have introduced Nietzsche to the music and writing ofRichard Wagner.[26]Perhaps under Ortlepp's influence, he and a student named Richter returned to school drunk and encountered a teacher, resulting in Nietzsche's demotion from first in his class and the end of his status as aprefect.[27]
After graduation in September 1864,[28]Nietzsche began studying theology and classical philology at theUniversity of Bonnin the hope of becoming aminister. For a short time, he and Deussen became members of theBurschenschaft(student association)Frankonia. After one semester (and to the anger of his mother), he stopped his theological studies and lost his faith.[29]As early as his 1862 essay "Fate and History", Nietzsche argued that historical research had discredited the central teachings of Christianity,[30]butDavid Strauss'sLife of Jesusalso seems to have had a profound effect on the young man.[29]In addition,Ludwig Feuerbach'sThe Essence of Christianityinfluenced young Nietzsche with its argument that people created God and not the other way around.[31]In June 1865, at the age of 20, Nietzsche wrote to his sister Elisabeth, who was deeply religious, a letter regarding his loss of faith. This letter contains the following statement:
Hence the ways of men part: if you wish to strive for peace of soul and pleasure, then believe; if you wish to be a devotee of truth, then inquire....[32]
Nietzsche subsequently concentrated on studying philology under ProfessorFriedrich Wilhelm Ritschl, whom he followed to theUniversity of Leipzigin 1865.[33]There, he became close friends with his fellow-studentErwin Rohde. Nietzsche's first philological publications appeared soon after.
In 1865 Nietzsche thoroughly studied the works ofArthur Schopenhauer. He owed the awakening of his philosophical interest to reading Schopenhauer'sThe World as Will and Representation,later admitting that Schopenhauer was one of the few thinkers whom he respected, dedicating the essay "Schopenhauer as Educator" in theUntimely Meditationsto him.
In 1866 he readFriedrich Albert Lange'sHistory of Materialism. Lange's descriptions ofImmanuel Kant's anti-materialistic philosophy, the rise of EuropeanMaterialism, Europe's increased concern with science,Charles Darwin's theory ofevolutionand the general rebellion against tradition and authority intrigued Nietzsche greatly. Nietzsche would ultimately argue the impossibility of an evolutionary explanation of the human aesthetic sense.[34]
In 1867 Nietzsche signed up for one year ofvoluntary servicewith thePrussian artillery divisionin Naumburg. He was regarded as one of the finestridersamong his fellow-recruits, and his officers predicted that he would soon reach the rank ofcaptain. In March 1868, while mounting his horse, Nietzsche struck his chest against thepommelandtore two musclesin his left side, leaving him exhausted and unable to walk for months.[35][36]Consequently, he turned his attention to his studies again, completing them in 1868. Nietzsche also metRichard Wagnerfor the first time later that year.[37][38]

## Professor at Basel (1869–1879)
In 1869, with Ritschl's support, Nietzsche received an offer to become a professor ofclassical philologyat theUniversity of Baselin Switzerland. He was only 24 years old and had neither completed his doctorate nor received a teaching certificate ("habilitation"). He was awarded anhonorary doctoratebyLeipzig Universityin March 1869, again with Ritschl's support.[39]
Despite his offer coming at a time when he was considering giving up philology for science, he accepted.[40]To this day, Nietzsche is still among the youngest of the tenured Classics professors on record.[41]
Nietzsche's 1870 projecteddoctoral thesis, "Contribution toward the Study and the Critique of the Sources of Diogenes Laertius" ("Beiträge zur Quellenkunde und Kritik des Laertius Diogenes"), examined the origins of the ideas ofDiogenes Laërtius.[42]Though never submitted, it was later published as aGratulationsschrift('congratulatory publication') inBasel.[43][d]
Before moving to Basel, Nietzsche renounced his Prussian citizenship: for the rest of his life he remained officiallystateless.[44][45]
Nevertheless, Nietzsche served in the Prussian forces during theFranco-Prussian War(1870–1871) as a medicalorderly. In his short time in the military, he experienced much and witnessed the traumatic effects of battle. He also contracteddiphtheriaanddysentery.[46]Walter Kaufmannspeculates that he also contractedsyphilisat a brothel along with his other infections at this time.[47][48]On returning to Basel in 1870, Nietzsche observed the establishment of theGerman EmpireandOtto von Bismarck's subsequent policies as an outsider and with a degree of scepticism regarding their genuineness. His inaugural lecture at the university was "Homer and Classical Philology". Nietzsche also metFranz Overbeck, a professor of theology who remained his friend throughout his life.Afrikan Spir, a little-known Russian philosopher responsible for the 1873Thought and Realityand Nietzsche's colleague, the historianJacob Burckhardt, whose lectures Nietzsche frequently attended, began to exercise significant influence on him.[49]
Nietzsche had already met Richard Wagner in Leipzig in 1868 and later Wagner's wife, Cosima. Nietzsche admired both greatly and during his time at Basel frequently visited Wagner's house inTribscheninLucerne. The Wagners brought Nietzsche into their most intimate circle—which includedFranz Liszt, of whom Nietzsche colloquially described: "Liszt or the art of running after women!"[50]Nietzsche enjoyed the attention he gave to the beginning of theBayreuth Festival. In 1870 he gave Cosima Wagner the manuscript of "The Genesis of the Tragic Idea" as a birthday gift. In 1872 Nietzsche published his first book,The Birth of Tragedy. His colleagues within his field, including Ritschl, expressed little enthusiasm for the work in which Nietzsche eschewed the classical philologic method in favour of a more speculative approach. In hispolemicPhilology of the Future,Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorffdamped the book's reception and increased its notoriety. In response, Rohde (then a professor inKiel) and Wagner came to Nietzsche's defence. Nietzsche remarked freely about the isolation he felt within the philological community and attempted unsuccessfully to transfer to a position in philosophy at Basel.
In 1873 Nietzsche began to accumulate notes that would be posthumously published asPhilosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks. Between 1873 and 1876, he published four separate long essays: "David Strauss: the Confessor and the Writer", "On the Use and Abuse of History for Life", "Schopenhauer as Educator", and "Richard Wagner in Bayreuth". These four later appeared in a collected edition under the titleUntimely Meditations. The essays shared the orientation of a cultural critique, challenging the developing German culture suggested by Schopenhauer and Wagner. During this time in the circle of the Wagners, he metMalwida von MeysenbugandHans von Bülow. He also began a friendship withPaul Réewho, in 1876, influenced him into dismissing thepessimismin his early writings. He was deeply disappointed by theBayreuth Festivalof 1876, where the banality of the shows and baseness of the public repelled him. He was also alienated by Wagner's championing of "German culture", which Nietzsche felt a contradiction in terms, as well as by Wagner's celebration of his fame among the German public. All this contributed to his subsequent decision to distance himself from Wagner.
With the publication in 1878 ofHuman, All Too Human(a book ofaphorismsranging from metaphysics to morality to religion), a new style of Nietzsche's work became clear, highly influenced byAfrikan Spir'sThought and Reality[51]and reacting against the pessimistic philosophy of Wagner and Schopenhauer. Nietzsche's friendship with Deussen and Rohde cooled as well. In 1879, after a significant decline in health, Nietzsche had to resign his position at Basel and was pensioned.[17]Since his childhood, various disruptive illnesses had plagued him, including moments of shortsightedness that left him nearly blind,migraineheadaches, and violent indigestion. The 1868 riding accident and diseases in 1870 may have aggravated these persistent conditions, which continued to affect him through his years at Basel, forcing him to take longer and longer holidays until regular work became impractical.

## Independent philosopher (1879–1888)
Living on his pension from Basel along with aid from friends, Nietzsche travelled frequently to find climates more conducive to his health. He lived until 1889 as an independent author in different cities. He spent many summers inSils MarianearSt. Moritzin Switzerland, and many of his winters in the Italian cities ofGenoa,Rapallo, andTurin, and the French city ofNice. In 1881, whenFrance occupied Tunisia, he planned to travel toTunisto view Europe from the outside but later abandoned that idea, probably for health reasons.[52]Nietzsche occasionally returned to Naumburg to visit his family, and, especially during this time, he and his sister, Elisabeth, had repeated periods of conflict and reconciliation.
While inGenoa, Nietzsche's failing eyesight prompted him to explore the use oftypewritersas a means of continuing to write. He is known to have tried using theHansen Writing Ball, a contemporary typewriter device. In the end, a past pupil of his,Peter Gast, became a private secretary to Nietzsche. In 1876, Gast transcribed the crabbed, nearly illegible handwriting of Nietzsche'sfirst time with[clarification needed]Richard Wagner in Bayreuth.[53]He subsequently transcribed and proofread the galleys for almost all of Nietzsche's work. On at least one occasion, on 23 February 1880, the usually poor Gast received 200 marks from their mutual friend, Paul Rée.[54]Gast was one of the very few friends Nietzsche allowed to criticise him. In responding most enthusiastically toAlso Sprach Zarathustra("Thus Spoke Zarathustra"), Gast did feel it necessary to point out that what were described as "superfluous" people were in fact quite necessary. He went on to list the number of peopleEpicurus, for example, had to rely on to supply his simple diet of goat cheese.[55]
To the end of his life, Gast and Overbeck remained consistently faithful friends.Malwida von Meysenbugremained like a motherly patron even outside the Wagner circle. Soon Nietzsche made contact with the music-critic Carl Fuchs. Nietzsche stood at the beginning of his most productive period. Beginning withHuman, All Too Humanin 1878, Nietzsche published one book or major section of a book each year until 1888, his last year of writing; that year, he completed five.
In 1882 Nietzsche published the first part ofThe Gay Science. That year he also metLou Andreas-Salomé,[56]through Malwida von Meysenbug andPaul Rée.
Salomé's mother took her to Rome when Salomé was 21. At a literary salon in the city, Salomé became acquainted withPaul Rée. Rée proposed marriage to her, but she, instead, proposed that they should live and study together as "brother and sister", along with another man for company, where they would establish an academic commune.[57]Rée accepted the idea and suggested that they be joined by his friend Nietzsche. The two met Nietzsche in Rome in April 1882, and Nietzsche is believed to have instantly fallen in love with Salomé, as Rée had done. Nietzsche asked Rée to propose marriage to Salomé, which she rejected. She had been interested in Nietzsche as a friend, but not as a husband.[57]Nietzsche nonetheless was content to join with Rée and Salomé touring through Switzerland and Italy together, planning their commune. The three travelled with Salomé's mother through Italy and considered where they would set up their "Winterplan" commune. They intended to set up their commune in an abandoned monastery, but no suitable location was found. On 13 May, in Lucerne, when Nietzsche was alone with Salomé, he earnestly proposed marriage to her again, which she rejected. He nonetheless was happy to continue with the plans for an academic commune.[57]After discovering the relationship, Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth became determined to get Nietzsche away from the "immoral woman".[58]Nietzsche and Salomé spent the summer together inTautenburgin Thuringia, often with Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth as a chaperone. Salomé reports that he asked her to marry him on three separate occasions and that she refused, though the reliability of her reports of events is questionable.[59]Arriving inLeipzig(Germany) in October, Salomé and Rée separated from Nietzsche after a falling-out between Nietzsche and Salomé, in which Salomé believed that Nietzsche was desperately in love with her.
While the three spent a number of weeks together in Leipzig in October 1882, the following month Rée and Salomé left Nietzsche, leaving for Stibbe (modern-dayZdbowoin Poland)[60]without any plans to meet again. Nietzsche soon fell into a period of mental anguish, although he continued to write to Rée, stating "We shall see one another from time to time, won't we?"[61]In later recriminations, Nietzsche would blame on separate occasions the failure in his attempts to woo Salomé on Salomé, Rée, and on the intrigues of his sister (who had written letters to the families of Salomé and Rée to disrupt the plans for the commune). Nietzsche wrote of the affair in 1883, that he now felt "genuine hatred for my sister".[61]
Amidst renewed bouts of illness, living in near-isolation after a falling out with his mother and sister regarding Salomé, Nietzsche fled to Rapallo, where he wrote the first part ofAlso Sprach Zarathustrain only ten days.
By 1882 Nietzsche was taking huge doses ofopiumand continued to have trouble sleeping.[62]In 1883, while staying in Nice, he was writing out his own prescriptions for the sedativechloral hydrate, signing them "Dr. Nietzsche".[63]
He turned away from the influence ofArthur Schopenhauer, and after he severed his social ties with Wagner, Nietzsche had few remaining friends. Now, with the new style ofZarathustra, his work became even more alienating, and the market received it only to the degree required by politeness. Nietzsche recognised this and maintained his solitude, though he often complained. His books remained largely unsold. In 1885, he printed only 40 copies of the fourth part ofZarathustraand distributed a fraction of them among close friends, includingHelene von Druskowitz.
In 1883 he tried and failed to obtain a lecturing post at theUniversity of Leipzig. According to a letter he wrote to Peter Gast, this was due to his "attitude towards Christianity and the concept of God".[64]
In 1886 Nietzsche broke with his publisher Ernst Schmeitzner, disgusted by his antisemitic opinions. Nietzsche saw his own writings as "completely buried and in this anti-Semitic dump" of Schmeitzner—associating the publisher with a movement that should be "utterly rejected with cold contempt by every sensible mind".[65]He then printedBeyond Good and Evilat his own expense. He also acquired the publication rights for his earlier works and over the next year issued second editions ofThe Birth of Tragedy,Human, All Too Human,Daybreak, and ofThe Gay Sciencewith new prefaces placing the body of his work in a more coherent perspective. Thereafter, he saw his work as completed for a time and hoped that soon a readership would develop. In fact, interest in Nietzsche's thought did increase at this time, if rather slowly and imperceptibly to him. During these years Nietzsche metMeta von Salis,Carl SpittelerandGottfried Keller.
In 1886 his sister, Elisabeth, married the antisemiteBernhard Försterand travelled to Paraguay to foundNueva Germania, a "Germanic" colony.[66][67]Through correspondence, Nietzsche's relationship with Elisabeth continued through cycles of conflict and reconciliation, but they met again only after his collapse. He continued to have frequent and painful attacks of illness, which made prolonged work impossible.
In 1887 Nietzsche wrote the polemicOn the Genealogy of Morality. During the same year, he encountered the work ofFyodor Dostoevsky, to whom he felt an immediate kinship.[68]He also exchanged letters withHippolyte TaineandGeorg Brandes. Brandes, who had started to teach the philosophy ofSøren Kierkegaardin the 1870s, wrote to Nietzsche asking him toread Kierkegaard, to which Nietzsche replied that he would come toCopenhagenand read Kierkegaard with him. Before fulfilling this promise, Nietzsche slipped too far into illness. At the beginning of 1888, Brandes delivered in Copenhagen one of the first lectures on Nietzsche's philosophy.
Although Nietzsche had previously announced at the end ofOn the Genealogy of Moralitya new work with the titleThe Will to Power: Attempt at aRevaluation of All Values, he seems to have abandoned this idea and, instead, used some of the draft passages to composeTwilight of the IdolsandThe Antichristin 1888.[69]
His health improved and he spent the summer in high spirits. In the autumn of 1888, his writings and letters began to reveal a higher estimation of his own status and "fate". He overestimated the increasing response to his writings, especially to the recent polemic,The Case of Wagner. On his 44th birthday, after completingTwilight of the IdolsandThe Antichrist, he decided to write the autobiographyEcce Homo. In its preface—which suggests Nietzsche was well aware of the interpretive difficulties his work would generate—he declares, "Hear me! For I am such and such a person. Above all, do not mistake me for someone else."[70]In December, Nietzsche began a correspondence withAugust Strindbergand thought that, short of an international breakthrough, he would attempt to buy back his older writings from the publisher and have them translated into other European languages. Moreover, he planned the publication of the compilationNietzsche contra Wagnerand of the poems that made up his collectionDionysian-Dithyrambs.

## Mental illness and death (1889–1900)
On 3 January 1889, Nietzsche suffered amental breakdown.[71]Two policemen approached him after he caused a public disturbance in the streets ofTurin. What happened remains unknown, but an often-repeated tale from shortly after his death states that Nietzsche witnessed the flogging of a horse at the other end of the Piazza Carlo Alberto, ran to the horse, threw his arms around its neck to protect it and then collapsed to the ground.[72][73]In the following few days Nietzsche sent short writings—known as theWahnzettelorWahnbriefe(literally "Delusion notes" or "letters")—to a number of friends includingCosima WagnerandJacob Burckhardt. Most of them were signed "Dionysus", though some were also signed "der Gekreuzigte" meaning "the crucified one". To his former colleague Burckhardt, Nietzsche wrote:[74]
I have hadCaiaphasput infetters. Also, last year I was crucified by the German doctors in a very drawn-out manner.Wilhelm,Bismarck, and all anti-Semites abolished.
Additionally, he commanded the German emperor to go to Rome to be shot and summoned the European powers to take military action against Germany,[75]writing also that the pope should be put in jail and that he, Nietzsche, created the world and was in the process of having all antisemites shot dead.[76]
On 6 January 1889 Burckhardt showed the letter he had received from Nietzsche to Overbeck. The following day, Overbeck received a similar letter and decided that Nietzsche's friends had to bring him back to Basel. Overbeck travelled to Turin and brought Nietzsche to a psychiatric clinic in Basel. By that time Nietzsche appeared fully in the grip of a serious mental illness,[77]and his mother Franziska decided to transfer him to a clinic inJenaunder the direction ofOtto Binswanger.[78]In January 1889, they proceeded with the planned release ofTwilight of the Idols, by that time already printed and bound. From November 1889 to February 1890, the art historianJulius Langbehnattempted to cure Nietzsche, claiming that the methods of the medical doctors were ineffective in treating Nietzsche's condition.[79]Langbehn assumed progressively greater control of Nietzsche until his secretiveness discredited him. In March 1890, Franziska removed Nietzsche from the clinic and, in May 1890, brought him to her home in Naumburg.[77]During this process Overbeck and Gast contemplated what to do with Nietzsche's unpublished works. In February they ordered a fifty-copy private edition ofNietzsche contra Wagner, but the publisher C. G. Naumann secretly printed one hundred. Overbeck and Gast decided to withhold publishingThe AntichristandEcce Homobecause of their more radical content.[77]Nietzsche's reception and recognition enjoyed their first surge.[80]
In 1893, Nietzsche's sister, Elisabeth, returned fromNueva Germaniain Paraguay following the suicide of her husband. She studied Nietzsche's works and, piece by piece, took control of their publication. Overbeck was dismissed and Gast finally co-operated. After the death of Franziska in 1897, Nietzsche lived inWeimar, where Elisabeth cared for him and allowed visitors, includingRudolf Steiner(who in 1895 had writtenFriedrich Nietzsche: A Fighter Against His Time, one of the first books praising Nietzsche),[81]to meet her uncommunicative brother. Elisabeth employed Steiner as a tutor to help her to understand her brother's philosophy. Steiner abandoned the attempt after only a few months, declaring that it was impossible to teach her anything about philosophy.[82]
Nietzsche's insanity was originally diagnosed astertiary syphilis, in accordance with a prevailing medical paradigm of the time. Although most commentators[who?]regard his breakdown as unrelated to his philosophy,Georges Bataillewrote poetically of his condition ("'Man incarnate' must also go mad")[83]andRené Girard's postmortem psychoanalysis posits a worshipful rivalry withRichard Wagner.[84]Girard suggests that Nietzsche signed his final letters as both Dionysus and the Crucified One because he was demonstrating that by being a god (Dionysus), one is also a victim (Crucified One) since a god still suffers by overcoming the law. Nietzsche had previously written, "All superior men who were irresistibly drawn to throw off the yoke of any kind of morality and to frame new laws had, if they were not actually mad, no alternative but to make themselves or pretend to be mad."  (Daybreak, 14) The diagnosis of syphilis has since been challenged and a diagnosis of "manic-depressive illnesswith periodicpsychosisfollowed byvascular dementia" was put forward by Cybulska prior to Schain's study.[85][86]Leonard Saxsuggested the slow growth of a right-sided retro-orbitalmeningiomaas an explanation of Nietzsche's dementia;[87]Orth and Trimble postulatedfrontotemporal dementia[88]while other researchers have proposed a hereditary stroke disorder calledCADASIL.[89]Poisoning bymercury, a treatment for syphilis at the time of Nietzsche's death,[90]has also been suggested.[91]
In 1898 and 1899 Nietzsche suffered at least two strokes. They partially paralysed him, leaving him unable to speak or walk. He likely suffered from clinicalhemiparesis/hemiplegia on the left side of his body by 1899. After contractingpneumoniain mid-August 1900, he suffered another stroke during the night of 24–25 August and died at about noon on 25 August.[92]Elisabeth had him buried beside his father at the church inRöckennearLützen. His friend and secretary Gast gave his funeral oration, proclaiming: "Holy be your name to all future generations!"[93]
Elisabeth Förster-NietzschecompiledThe Will to Powerfrom Nietzsche's unpublished notebooks and published it posthumously in 1901. Because his sister arranged the book based on her own conflation of several of Nietzsche's early outlines and took liberties with the material, the scholarly consensus has been that it does not reflect Nietzsche's intent. (For example, Elisabeth removed aphorism 35 ofThe Antichrist, where Nietzsche rewrote a passage of the Bible.)Mazzino Montinari, the editor of Nietzsche'sNachlass, called it a forgery.[94][incomplete short citation]Yet, the endeavour to rescue Nietzsche's reputation by discreditingThe Will to Poweroften leads to scepticism about the value of his late notes, even of his wholeNachlass. HisNachlassandThe Will to Powerare distinct.[95]

## Citizenship, nationality and ethnicity
General commentators and Nietzsche scholars, whether emphasising his cultural background or his language, overwhelmingly label Nietzsche as a "German philosopher".[96][97][33][98]Others do not assign him a national category.[99][100][101]While Germany had not yet been unified into a single sovereign state, Nietzsche was born a citizen ofPrussia, which was mostly part of theGerman Confederation.[102]His birthplace,Röcken, is in the modern German state ofSaxony-Anhalt. When he accepted his post at Basel, Nietzsche applied for annulment of his Prussian citizenship.[103]The official revocation of his citizenship came in a document dated 17 April 1869,[104]and for the rest of his life he remained officiallystateless.
At least towards the end of his life, Nietzsche believed his ancestors werePolish.[105]He wore asignet ringbearing theRadwan coat of arms, traceable back toPolish nobilityof medieval times[106]and the surname "Nicki" of the Polish noble (szlachta) family bearing that coat of arms.[107][108]Gotard Nietzsche, a member of the Nicki family, left Poland forPrussia. His descendants later settled in theElectorate of Saxonycirca the year 1700.[109]Nietzsche wrote in 1888, "My ancestors were Polish noblemen (Nietzky); the type seems to have been well preserved despite three generations of German mothers."[110]At one point, Nietzsche became even more adamant about his Polish identity. "I am a pure-blooded Polish nobleman, without a single drop of bad blood, certainly not German blood."[111]On yet another occasion, Nietzsche stated, "Germany is a great nation only because its people have so much Polish blood in their veins.... I am proud of my Polish descent."[112]Nietzsche believed his name might have beenGermanised, in one letter claiming, "I was taught to ascribe the origin of my blood and name to Polish noblemen who were called Niëtzky and left their home and nobleness about a hundred years ago, finally yielding to unbearable suppression: they wereProtestants."[113]
Most scholars dispute Nietzsche's account of his family's origins. Hans von Müller debunked the genealogy put forward by Nietzsche's sister in favour of Polish noble heritage.[114]Max Oehler, Nietzsche's cousin and curator of theNietzsche ArchiveatWeimar, argued that all of Nietzsche's ancestors bore German names, including the wives' families.[110]Oehler claims that Nietzsche came from a long line of GermanLutheranclergymen on both sides of his family, and modern scholars regard the claim of Nietzsche's Polish ancestry as "pure invention".[115]Colli and Montinari, the editors of Nietzsche's assembled letters, gloss Nietzsche's claims as a "mistaken belief" and "without foundation".[116][117]The nameNietzscheitself is not a Polish name, but an exceptionally common one throughout central Germany, in this and cognate forms (such asNitscheandNitzke). The name derives from the forenameNikolaus, abbreviated toNick; assimilated with the SlavicNitz; it first becameNitscheand thenNietzsche.[110]
It is not known why Nietzsche wanted to be thought of as Polish nobility. According to the biographerR. J. Hollingdale, Nietzsche's propagation of the Polish ancestry myth may have been part of his "campaign against Germany".[110]Nicholas D. More states that Nietzsche's claims of having an illustrious lineage were a parody on autobiographical conventions, and suspectsEcce Homo, with its self-laudatory titles, such as "Why I Am So Wise", as being a work of satire.[118]He concludes that Nietzsche's supposed Polish genealogy was a joke—not a delusion.[118]

## Relationships and sexuality
Nietzsche was never married. He proposed toLou Salométhree times and each time was rejected.[119]One theory blames Salomé's view on sexuality as one of the reasons for her alienation from Nietzsche. As articulated in her 1898 novellaFenitschka, Salomé viewed the idea of sexual intercourse as prohibitive and marriage as a violation, with some suggesting that they indicatedsexual repressionandneurosis.[120]
Deussen cited the episode ofCologne's brothel in February 1865 as instrumental to understanding the philosopher's way of thinking, mostly about women. Nietzsche was surreptitiously accompanied to a "call house" from which he clumsily escaped upon seeing "a half dozen apparitions dressed in sequins and veils." According to Deussen, Nietzsche "never decided to remain unmarried all his life. For him, women had to sacrifice themselves to the care and benefit of men."[46]Nietzsche scholarJoachim Köhler[de]has attempted to explain Nietzsche's life history and philosophy by claiming that he was homosexual. Köhler argues that Nietzsche's supposed syphilis, which is "usually considered to be the product of his encounter with a prostitute in a brothel inCologneorLeipzig, is equally likely. Some maintain that Nietzsche contracted it in a male brothel inGenoa."[121]The acquisition of the infection from a homosexual brothel was the theory believed bySigmund Freud, who citedOtto Binswangeras his source.[122]Köhler also suggests that Nietzsche had a romantic relationship, as well as a friendship, withPaul Rée.[123]It has been claimed that Nietzsche's homosexuality was widely known in theVienna Psychoanalytic Society, with Nietzsche's friendPaul Deussenclaiming that "he was a man who had never touched a woman."[124][125]
Köhler's views have not found wide acceptance among Nietzsche scholars and commentators. Allan Megill argues that, while Köhler's claim that Nietzsche was conflicted about his homosexual desire cannot simply be dismissed, "the evidence is very weak", and Köhler may be projecting twentieth-century understandings of sexuality on nineteenth-century notions of friendship.[123]It is also rumoured that Nietzsche frequentedheterosexualbrothels.[122]Nigel RodgersandMel Thompsonhave argued that continuous sickness and headaches hindered Nietzsche from engaging much with women. Yet they offer examples of Nietzsche's expressing affection to women, including Wagner's wifeCosima Wagner.[126]On Cosima's birthday, on 19 December 1876, Nietzsche, hoping "to gain a confidant", sent her "a trusting letter".[127]
Scholars have argued that Köhler's sexuality-based interpretation is not helpful in understanding Nietzsche's philosophy.[128][129]Some stress that, if Nietzsche preferred men—with this preference constituting hispsychosexualmake-up—but could not admit his desires to himself, it meant he acted in conflict with his philosophy.[130]

## Philosophy
Because of Nietzsche's evocative style and provocative ideas, his philosophy generates passionate reactions. His works remain controversial, due to varying interpretations. In Western philosophy, Nietzsche's writings have been described as a case of free revolutionary thought, that is, revolutionary in its structure and problems, although not tied to any revolutionary project.[131]His writings have also been described as a revolutionary project in which his philosophy serves as the foundation of a European cultural rebirth.[132][133]

## Apollonian and Dionysian
TheApollonian and Dionysianis a two-fold philosophical concept based on two figures in ancient Greek mythology,ApolloandDionysus. This relationship takes the form of adialectic.[134]Even though the concept is related toThe Birth of Tragedy, the poetFriedrich Hölderlinhad already spoken of it, andJohann Joachim Winckelmannhad talked of Dionysus' Roman equivalent,Bacchus.
Nietzsche found in classical Athenian tragedy an art form thattranscendedthe pessimism found in the so-calledwisdom of Silenus. The Greek spectators, by looking into the abyss of human suffering depicted by characters on stage, passionately and joyously affirmed life, finding it worth living. The main theme inThe Birth of Tragedyis that the fusion of Dionysian and ApollonianKunsttriebe("artistic impulses") forms dramatic arts or tragedies. He argued that this fusion has not been achieved since the ancient Greektragedians. Apollo represents harmony, progress, clarity, logic and theprinciple of individuation, whereas Dionysus represents disorder, intoxication, emotion, ecstasy and unity (hence the omission of the principle of individuation).
Nietzsche strongly distinguishes his Dionysus from the Dionysus of the Orphic tradition, which he considers a later corruption of the original Dionysian force. To him in the pre-Homeric world, Dionysian civilisations were marked by barbarism, cruelty, and ecstatic sexual excess, unrestrained by rational or moral principles. Nietzsche associates this period with unmediated life-affirmation, where violence and eroticism intertwined as expressions of raw vitality.[135]The Orphics, overwhelmed by anxiety toward this unmitigated savagery, reacted by turning away from the physical world and abstracting their gods into metaphysical ideas. In doing so, they transformed Dionysus from a figure of visceral power into a god of suffering and redemption and, in parallel, converted man from a being of flesh and instincts into a soul burdened with guilt and the need for purification.[136]
Nietzsche criticises this Orphic reinterpretation as an early decline in Greek spiritual health, arguing that it marked the beginning of an anti-life tendency that would later manifest in Platonism and Christianity.[135]He further argues that Socrates and Euripides continued the Orphic trajectory, replacing instinct, myth, and artistic frenzy with rationalism, dialectic, and moral didacticism. By doing so, they undermined the ecstatic and violent balance of Apollonian and Dionysian forces, ultimately leading to the decline of Greek tragedy.[137]
Nietzsche used these two forces because, for him, the world of mind and order on one side, and passion and chaos on the other, formed principles that were fundamental to theGreek culture:[138][139]the Apollonian a dreaming state, full of illusions; and Dionysian a state of intoxication, representing the liberation of instincts and dissolution of boundaries. In this mould, a man appears as thesatyr. He is the horror of the annihilation of the principle ofindividualityand at the same time someone who delights in its destruction.[140]
Apollonian and Dionysian juxtapositions appear in the interplay of tragedy: the tragic hero of the drama, the main protagonist, struggles to make (Apollonian) order of his unjust and chaotic (Dionysian) fate, though he dies unfulfilled. Elaborating on the conception ofHamletas an intellectual who cannot make up his mind, and is a livingantithesisto the man of action, Nietzsche argues that a Dionysian figure possesses the knowledge that his actions cannot change the eternal balance of things, and it disgusts him enough not to act at all. Hamlet falls under this category—he glimpsed the supernatural reality through the Ghost; he has gained true knowledge and knows that no action of his has the power to change this. For the audience of such drama, this tragedy allows them to sense what Nietzsche called thePrimordial Unity, which revives Dionysian nature. He describes primordial unity as the increase of strength, the experience of fullness and plenitude bestowed byfrenzy. Frenzy acts as intoxication and is crucial for thephysiologicalcondition that enables the creation of any art.[citation needed]Stimulated by this state, a person's artistic will is enhanced:
In this state one enriches everything out of one's own fullness: whatever one sees, whatever wills is seen swelled, taut, strong, overloaded with strength. A man in this state transforms things until they mirror his power—until they are reflections of his perfection. This having to transform into perfection is—art.
Nietzsche is adamant that the works ofAeschylusandSophoclesrepresent the apex of artistic creation, the true realisation of tragedy; it is withEuripides, that tragedy begins itsUntergang(literally 'going under' or 'downward-way;' meaning decline, deterioration, downfall, death, etc.). Nietzsche objects to Euripides' use ofSocratic rationalismandmoralityin his tragedies, claiming that the infusion of ethics andreasonrobs tragedy of its foundation, namely the fragile balance of the Dionysian and Apollonian.Socratesemphasised reason to such a degree that he diffused the value of myth and suffering to human knowledge.Platocontinued along this path in his dialogues, and the modern world eventually inherited reason at the expense of artistic impulses found in the Apollonian and Dionysian dichotomy. He notes that without the Apollonian, the Dionysian lacks the form and structure to make a coherent piece of art, and without the Dionysian, the Apollonian lacks the necessary vitality and passion. Only the fertile interplay of these two forces brought together as an art represented the best of Greek tragedy.[141]
An example of the impact of this idea can be seen in the bookPatterns of Culture, where the anthropologistRuth Benedictacknowledges Nietzschean opposites of "Apollonian" and "Dionysian" as the stimulus for her thoughts aboutNative American cultures.[142]Carl Junghas written extensively on the dichotomy inPsychological Types.[143]Michel Foucaultcommented that his own bookMadness and Civilizationshould be read "under the sun of the great Nietzschean inquiry". Here Foucault referenced Nietzsche's description of the birth and death of tragedy and his explanation that the subsequent tragedy of the Western world was the refusal of the tragic and, with that, refusal of the sacred.[144]The painterMark Rothkowas influenced by Nietzsche's view of tragedy presented inThe Birth of Tragedy.

## Death of God and nihilism
The statement "God is dead", occurring in several of Nietzsche's works (notably inThe Gay Science), has become one of his best-known remarks. On the basis of it, many commentators[145]regard Nietzsche as anatheist; others (such as Kaufmann) suggest that this statement might reflect a more subtle understanding of divinity. Nietzsche predicted that the scientific developments and the increasingsecularisationof Europe had 'killed' theAbrahamicGod in a metaphorical sense, who had served as the basis for meaning and value in the West for more than a thousand years.
Nietzsche believed that Christian moral doctrine was originally constructed to counteract nihilism. It provides people with traditional beliefs about themoral valuesof good and evil, belief in God, and a framework with which one might claim to haveobjective knowledge. In constructing a world where objective knowledge is supposed to be possible, Christianity is an antidote to a primal form of nihilism—the despair of meaninglessness. AsMartin Heideggerput the problem, "If God as the supra sensory ground and goal of all reality is dead if the supra sensory world of the ideas has suffered the loss of its obligatory and above it its vitalising and upbuilding power, then nothing more remains to which man can cling and by which he can orient himself."[146][incomplete short citation]
One such reaction to the loss of meaning is what Nietzsche calledpassive nihilism, which he recognised in thepessimisticphilosophy ofArthur Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer's doctrine—which Nietzsche also referred to asWestern Buddhism—advocates separating oneself from will and desires to reduce suffering. Nietzsche characterised thisasceticattitude as a "will to nothingness". Life turns away from itself as there is nothing of value to be found in the world. This moving away of all value in the world is characteristic of the nihilist, although, in this, the nihilist appears to be inconsistent; this "will to nothingness" is still a (disavowed) form of willing.[147]
A nihilist is a man who judges that the real world oughtnotto be and that the world as it ought to do not exist. According to this view, our existence (action,suffering, willing, feeling) has no meaning: this 'in vain' is the nihilists' pathos—an inconsistency on the part of the nihilists.
— Friedrich Nietzsche, KSA 12:9 [60], taken fromThe Will to Power, section 585, translated byWalter Kaufmann
Nietzsche approached the problem of nihilism as a deeply personal one, stating that this problem of the modern world had "become conscious" in him.[148]Furthermore, he emphasised the danger of nihilism and the possibilities it offers, as seen in his statement that "I praise, I do not reproach, [nihilism's] arrival. I believe it is one of the greatest crises, a moment of the deepest self-reflection of humanity. Whether man recovers from it, whether he becomes a master of this crisis, is a question of his strength!"[149]According to Nietzsche, it is only when nihilism isovercomethat a culture can have a true foundation on which to thrive. He wished to hasten its coming only so that he could also hasten its ultimate departure. Heidegger interpreted the death of God with what he explained as the death ofmetaphysics. He concluded that metaphysics has reached its potential and that the ultimate fate and downfall of metaphysics was proclaimed with the statement "God is dead."[150]
Scholars such asKeiji NishitaniandGraham Parkeshave aligned Nietzsche's religious thought withBuddhistthinkers, particularly those of theMahayanatradition.[151]Occasionally, Nietzsche has also been considered in relation to Catholic mystics such asMeister Eckhart.[152]Milne has argued against such interpretations on the grounds that such thinkers from Western and Eastern religious traditions strongly emphasise the divestment of will and the loss of ego, while Nietzsche offers a robust defence of egoism.[153]Milne argues that Nietzsche's religious thought is better understood in relation to his self-professed ancestors: "Heraclitus,Empedocles,Spinoza,Goethe".[154]Milne plays particularly close attention to Nietzsche's relationship to Goethe, who has typically been neglected in research by academic philosophers. Milne shows that Goethe's views on the one and the many allow a reciprocal determinism between part and whole, meaning that a claimed identity between part and whole does not give the part value solely in terms of belonging to the whole. In essence, this allows for a unitive sense of the individual's relationship to the universe, while also fostering a sense of "self-esteem" which Nietzsche found lacking in mystics such as Eckhart.[155]
With regard to Nietzsche's development of thought, it has been noted in research that although he dealt with "nihilistic" themes ("pessimism, with nirvana and with nothingness and non-being"[156]) from 1869 onwards, a conceptual use of nihilism first took place in handwritten notes in mid-1880. This period saw the publication of a then popular work that reconstructed so-called "Russian nihilism" on the basis of Russian newspaper reports (N. Karlowitsch: The Development of Nihilism. Berlin 1880), which is significant for Nietzsche's terminology .[157]

## Eternal return
"Eternal return" (also known as "eternal recurrence") is a hypothetical concept that posits that the universe has been recurring, and will continue to recur, for an infinite number of times across infinite time or space. It is a purelyphysicalconcept, involving no supernaturalreincarnation, but the return of beings in the same bodies. Nietzsche first proposed the idea of eternal return in a parable in Section 341 ofThe Gay Science, and also in the chapter "Of the Vision and the Riddle" inThus Spoke Zarathustra, among other places.[158]Nietzsche considered it as potentially "horrifying and paralyzing", and said that its burden is the "heaviest weight" imaginable ("das schwerste Gewicht").[159]The wish for the eternal return of all events would mark the ultimate affirmation of life, a reaction toSchopenhauer's praise of denying the will-to-live. To comprehend eternal recurrence, and to not only come to peace with it but to embrace it, requiresamor fati, "love of fate".[160]AsMartin Heideggernoted in his lectures on Nietzsche, Nietzsche's first mention of eternal recurrence presents this concept as ahypotheticalquestionrather than stating it as fact. According to Heidegger, it is the burden imposed by thequestionof eternal recurrence – the mere possibility of it, and the reality of speculating on that possibility – which is so significant in modern thought: "The way Nietzsche here patterns the first communication of the thought of the 'greatest burden' [of eternal recurrence] makes it clear that this 'thought of thoughts' is at the same time 'the most burdensome thought.'"[161]
Alexander Nehamaswrites inNietzsche: Life as Literatureof three ways of seeing the eternal recurrence:
Nehamas concluded that, if individuals constitute themselves through their actions, they can only maintain themselves in their current state by living in a recurrence of past actions.[162]Nietzsche's thought is the negation of the idea of a history of salvation.[163]

## Perspectivism
Nietzsche claimed thedeath of Godwould eventually lead to the realisation that there can never be a universal perspective on things and that the traditional idea ofobjective truthis incoherent.[164][165][166][incomplete short citation]Nietzsche rejected the idea of objective reality, arguing that knowledge iscontingentand conditional, relative to various fluid perspectives or interests.[167]This leads to constant reassessment of rules (i.e., those of philosophy, the scientific method, etc.) according to the circumstances of individual perspectives.[168]This view has acquired the nameperspectivism.
InThus Spoke ZarathustraNietzsche proclaimed that a table of values hangs above every great person. He pointed out that what is common among different peoples is the act of esteeming, of creating values, even if the values are different from one person to the next. Nietzsche asserted that what made people great was not the content of their beliefs, but the act of valuing. Thus the values a community strives to articulate are not as important as the collective will to see those values come to pass. The willingness is more essential than the merit of the goal itself, according to Nietzsche. "A thousand goals have there been so far", says Zarathustra, "for there are a thousand peoples. Only the yoke for the thousand necks is still lacking: the one goal is lacking. Humanity still has no goal." Hence, the title of the aphorism, "On The Thousand And One Goal". The idea that one value-system is no more worthy than the next, although it may not be directly ascribed to Nietzsche, has become a common premise in modern social science.Max WeberandMartin Heideggerabsorbed it and made it their own. It shaped their philosophical and cultural endeavours, as well as their political understanding. Weber, for example, relied on Nietzsche's perspectivism by maintaining that objectivity is still possible—but only after a particular perspective, value, or end has been established.[169][170]
Among his critique of traditional philosophy ofImmanuel Kant,René DescartesandPlatoinBeyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche attacked thething in itselfandcogito ergo sum("I think, therefore I am") asunfalsifiablebeliefs based on naive acceptance of previous notions andfallacies.[171]The philosopherAlasdair MacIntyreput Nietzsche in a high place in the history of philosophy. While criticising nihilism and Nietzsche together as a sign of general decay,[172]he still commended him for recognising psychological motives behind Kant andDavid Hume's moral philosophy:[173]
For it was Nietzsche's historic achievement to understand more clearly than any other philosopher ... not only that what purported to be appeals ofobjectivitywere in fact expressions of subjective will, but also the nature of the problems that this posed for philosophy.[174]

## Slave revolt in morals
InBeyond Good and EvilandOn the Genealogy of MoralityNietzsche'sgenealogicalaccount of the development of modern moral systems occupies a central place. For Nietzsche a fundamental shift took place during the human history from thinking in terms of "good and bad" toward "good and evil".
The initial form of morality was set by a warrioraristocracyand other ruling castes of ancient civilisations. Aristocratic values of good and bad coincided with and reflected their relationship to lowercastessuch as slaves. Nietzsche presented this "master morality" as the original system of morality—perhaps best associated withHomericGreece.[175]To be "good" was to be happy and to have the things related to happiness: wealth, strength, health, power, etc. To be "bad" was to be like the slaves over whom the aristocracy ruled: poor, weak, sick, pathetic—objects of pity or disgust rather than hatred.[176]
"Slave morality" developed as a reaction to master morality. Value emerges from the contrast between good and evil: good being associated with other-worldliness, charity, piety, restraint, meekness, and submission; while evil is worldly, cruel, selfish, wealthy, and aggressive. Nietzsche saw slave morality as pessimistic and fearful, its values emerging to improve the self-perception of slaves. He associated slave morality with the Jewish and Christian traditions, as it is born out of theressentimentof slaves. Nietzsche argued that the idea of equality allowed slaves to overcome their own conditions without despising themselves. By denying the inherent inequality of people—in success, strength, beauty, and intelligence—slaves acquired a method of escape, namely by generating new values on the basis of rejecting master morality. It was used as an attempt to overcome the slave's sense of inferiority before their (better-off) masters. It does so by depicting slave weakness, for example, as a matter of choice, by relabelling it as "meekness". The "good man" of master morality is precisely the "evil man" of slave morality, while the "bad man" is recast as the "good man". Slave morality, however, leads to seeing the present state of the world as unjust, and creates the need for a belief in an afterlife, where the "evil man" (the master) will be punished, while the "good man" (the slave) will be rewarded.[175]
Nietzsche saw slave morality as a source of the nihilism that has overtaken Europe: it had led to view earthly life as inherently unfair, only justified as a prelude to the world to come; as such, the ever-increasing loss of belief in religion and Heaven had led to utter despair and pessimism. Furthermore, modern Europe and Christianity exist in a hypocritical state due to a tension between master and slave morality, both contradictory values determining, to varying degrees, the values of most Europeans (who are "motley"). Nietzsche called for exceptional people not to be ashamed in the face of a supposed morality-for-all, which he deems to be harmful to the flourishing of exceptional people. He cautioned that morality, per se, is not bad; it is good for the masses and should be left to them. Exceptional people, in contrast, should follow their own "inner law".[175]A favourite motto of Nietzsche, taken fromPindar, reads: "Become what you are."[177]
A long-standing assumption about Nietzsche is that he preferred master over slave morality. The eminent Nietzsche scholarWalter Kaufmannrejected this interpretation, writing that Nietzsche's analyses of these two types of morality were used only in adescriptiveand historic sense; they were not meant for any kind of acceptance or glorification.[178]On the other hand, Nietzsche called master morality "a higher order of values, the noble ones, those that say Yes to life, those that guarantee the future".[179]Just as "there is an order of rank between man and man", there is also an order of rank "between morality and morality".[180]Nietzsche waged a philosophic war against the slave morality of Christianity in his "revaluation of all values" to bring about the victory of a new master morality that he called the "philosophy of the future" (Beyond Good and Evilis subtitledPrelude to a Philosophy of the Future).[181]
InDaybreakNietzsche began his "Campaign against Morality".[182][183]He called himself an "immoralist" and harshly criticised the prominent moral philosophies of his day: Christianity,Kantianismandutilitarianism. Nietzsche's concept "God is dead" applies to the doctrines ofChristendom, though not to all other faiths: he claimed thatBuddhismis a successful religion that he complimented for fostering critical thought.[184]Still, Nietzsche saw his philosophy as a counter-movement to nihilism through appreciation of art:
Art as the single superior counterforce against all will to negation of life, art as the anti-Christian, anti-Buddhist, anti-Nihilist par excellence.[185]
Nietzsche claimed that the Christian faith as practised was not a proper representation of Jesus' teachings, as it forced people merely to believe in the way of Jesus but not to act as Jesus did; in particular, his example of refusing to judge people, something that Christians constantly did.[184]He condemned institutionalised Christianity for emphasising a morality ofpity(Mitleid), which assumes an inherent illness in society:[186]
Christianity is called the religion ofpity. Pity stands opposed to the tonic emotions which heighten our vitality: it has a depressing effect. We are deprived of strength when we feel pity. That loss of strength in which suffering as such inflicts on life is still further increased and multiplied by pity. Pity makes suffering contagious.[187]
InEcce HomoNietzsche called the establishment of moral systems based on a dichotomy ofgood and evila "calamitous error",[188]and wished to initiate are-evaluationof thevaluesof the Christian world.[189]He indicated his desire to bring about a new, more naturalistic source of value in the vital impulses of life itself.
While Nietzsche attacked the principles of Judaism, he was notantisemitic: in his workOn the Genealogy of Morality, he explicitly condemned antisemitism and pointed out that his attack on Judaism was not an attack on contemporary Jewish people but specifically an attack upon the ancient Jewish priesthood who he claimedantisemitic Christiansparadoxically based their views upon.[190]
Nietzsche felt that modern antisemitism was "despicable" and contrary to European ideals.[191]Its cause, in his opinion, was the growth in European nationalism and the endemic "jealousy and hatred" of Jewish success.[191]He wrote that Jews should be thanked for helping uphold a respect for the philosophies of ancient Greece,[191]and for giving rise to "the noblest human being (Christ), the purest philosopher (Baruch Spinoza), the mightiest book, and the most effective moral code in the world".[192]

## Übermensch
Another concept important to understanding Nietzsche is theÜbermensch(Superman).[193][194][195][196]Writing about nihilism inAlso Sprach Zarathustra, Nietzsche introduced anÜbermensch. According toLaurence Lampert, "the death of God must be followed by a long twilight of piety and nihilism (II. 19; III. 8). Zarathustra's gift of the overman is given to mankind not aware of the problem to which the overman is the solution."[197]Zarathustra presents theÜbermenschas the creator of new values, and he appears as a solution to the problem of the death of God and nihilism. TheÜbermenschdoes not follow the morality of common people since that favours mediocrity but rises above the notion ofgood and eviland above the "herd".[198]In this way Zarathustra proclaims his ultimate goal as the journey towards the state of theÜbermensch. He wants a kind of spiritual evolution of self-awareness and overcoming of traditional views on morality and justice that stem from thesuperstitiousbeliefs still deeply rooted or related to the notion of God and Christianity.[199]
FromThus Spoke Zarathustra(Zarathustra's Prologue; pp. 9–11):[200]
I teach you the Übermensch. Man is something that shall be overcome. What have you done to overcome him? All beings so far have created something beyond themselves: and you want to be the ebb of that great tide, and would rather go back to the beast than overcome man? What is the ape to man? A laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment. And just the same shall man be to the Übermensch: a laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment. You have made your way from worm to man, and much within you is still worm. Once you were apes, and even yet man is more of an ape than any ape. Even the wisest among you is only a conflict and hybrid of plant and ghost. But do I bid you become ghosts or plants? Behold, I teach you the Übermensch! The Übermensch is the meaning of the earth. Let your will say: The Übermenschshall bethe meaning of the earth... Man is a rope stretched between the animal and the Übermensch—a rope over an abyss... What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal: what is lovable in man is that he is anover-goingand agoing under.
Zarathustra contrasts theÜbermenschwith thelast manof egalitarian modernity (the most obvious example being democracy), an alternative goal humanity might set for itself. The last man is possible only by mankind's having bred anapatheticcreature who has no great passion or commitment, who is unable to dream, who merely earns his living and keeps warm. This concept appears only inThus Spoke Zarathustra, and is presented as a condition that would render the creation of theÜbermenschimpossible.[201][better source needed]
Some[202]have suggested that the eternal return is related to theÜbermensch, since willing the eternal return of the same is a necessary step if theÜbermenschis to create new values untainted by the spirit of gravity orasceticism. Values involve a rank-ordering of things, and so are inseparable from approval and disapproval, yet it was dissatisfaction that prompted men to seek refuge in other-worldliness and embrace other-worldly values. It could seem that theÜbermensch, in being devoted to any values at all, would necessarily fail to create values that did not share some bit of asceticism. Willing the eternal recurrence is presented as accepting the existence of the low while still recognising it as the low, and thus as overcoming the spirit of gravity or asceticism. One must have the strength of theÜbermenschto will the eternal recurrence. Only theÜbermenschwill have the strength to fully accept all of his past life, including his failures and misdeeds, and to truly will their eternal return. This action nearly kills Zarathustra, for example, and most human beings cannot avoid other-worldliness because they really are sick, not because of any choice they made.
The Nazis attempted to incorporate the concept into their ideology by means of taking Nietzsche's figurative form of speech and creating a literal superiority over other ethnicities. After Nietzsche's death his sister,Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche, became the curator and editor of his manuscripts. She reworked Nietzsche's unpublished writings to fit her ownGerman nationalistideology while often contradicting or obfuscating Nietzsche's stated opinions, which were explicitlyopposed to antisemitism and nationalism. Through her published editions, Nietzsche's work became associated withfascismandNazism;[203]20th-century scholars contested this interpretation of his work and corrected editions of his writings were soon made available.
Although Nietzsche has been misrepresented as a predecessor to Nazism, he criticised antisemitism,pan-Germanismand, to a lesser extent,nationalism.[204]Thus, he broke with his editor in 1886 because of his opposition to his editor's antisemitic stances, and his rupture withRichard Wagner, expressed inThe Case of WagnerandNietzsche contra Wagner, both of which he wrote in 1888, had much to do with Wagner's endorsement of pan-Germanism and antisemitism—and also of his rallying to Christianity. In a 29 March 1887 letter toTheodor Fritsch, Nietzsche mocked antisemites, Fritsch,Eugen Dühring, Wagner, Ebrard,Adolf Wahrmund, and the leading advocate of pan-Germanism,Paul de Lagarde, who would become, along with Wagner andHouston Chamberlain, the main official influences ofNazism.[83]This 1887 letter to Fritsch ended by: "And finally, how do you think I feel when the name Zarathustra is mouthed by anti-Semites?"[205]In contrast to these examples, Nietzsche's close friendFranz Overbeckrecalled in his memoirs, "When he speaks frankly, the opinions he expresses about Jews go, in their severity, beyond any anti-Semitism. The foundation of his anti-Christianity is essentially anti-Semitic."[206]

## Will to power
A basic element in Nietzsche's philosophical outlook is the "will to power" (der Wille zur Macht), which he maintained provides a basis for understanding human behaviour—more so than competing explanations, such as the ones based on pressure for adaptation or survival.[207][208]As such, according to Nietzsche, the drive for conservation appears as the major motivator of human or animal behaviour only in exceptions, as the general condition of life is not one of a 'struggle for existence.'[209]More often than not, self-conservation is a consequence of a creature's will to exert its strength on the outside world.
In presenting his theory of human behaviour, Nietzsche also addressed and attacked concepts from philosophies then popularly embraced, such as Schopenhauer's notion of an aimless will or that ofutilitarianism. Utilitarians claim that what moves people is the desire to be happy and accumulate pleasure in their lives. But such a conception of happiness Nietzsche rejected as something limited to, and characteristic of, the bourgeois lifestyle of the English society,[210]and instead put forth the idea that happiness is not an aimper se. It is a consequence of overcoming hurdles to one's actions and the fulfilment of the will.[211]
Related to his theory of the will to power is his speculation, which he did not deem final,[212]regarding the reality of the physical world, including inorganic matter—that, like man's affections and impulses, the material world is also set by the dynamics of a form of the will to power. At the core of his theory is a rejection ofatomism—the idea that matter is composed of stable, indivisible units (atoms). Instead, he seemed to have accepted the conclusions ofRuđer Bošković, who explained the qualities of matter as a result of an interplay of forces.[e][213]One study of Nietzsche defines his fully developed concept of the will to power as "the element from which derive both the quantitative difference of related forces and the quality that devolves into each force in this relation" revealing the will to power as "the principle of the synthesis of forces".[214]Of such forces Nietzsche said they could perhaps be viewed as a primitive form of the will. Likewise, he rejected the view that the movement of bodies is ruled by inexorable laws of nature, positing instead that movement was governed by the power relations between bodies and forces.[215]
Other scholars disagree that Nietzsche considered the material world to be a form of the will to power: Nietzsche thoroughly criticised metaphysics, and by including the will to power in the material world, he would simply be setting up a new metaphysics. Other than Aphorism 36 inBeyond Good and Evil, where he raised a question regarding will to power as being in the material world, they argue, it was only in his notes (unpublished by himself), where he wrote about a metaphysical will to power. And they also claim that Nietzsche directed his landlord to burn those notes in 1888 when he left Sils Maria.[216]According to these scholars, the "burning" story supports their thesis that Nietzsche rejected his project on the will to power at the end of his lucid life. A study (Huang 2019) shows that although it is true that in 1888 Nietzsche wanted some of his notes burned, this indicates little about his project on the will to power, not only because only 11 "aphorisms" saved from the flames were ultimately incorporated intoThe Will to Power(this book contains 1067 "aphorisms"), but also because these abandoned notes mainly focus on topics such as the critique of morality while touching upon the "feeling of power" only once.[95]

## Reading and influence
A trained philologist, Nietzsche had a thorough knowledge ofGreek philosophy. He readImmanuel Kant,Plato,John Stuart Mill,Arthur SchopenhauerandAfrikan Spir,[217]who became the main opponents in his philosophy, and later engaged, via the work ofKuno Fischerin particular, with the thought ofBaruch Spinoza, whom he saw as his "precursor" in many respects[218][219]but as a personification of the "ascetic ideal" in others. Nietzsche referred to Kant as a "moral fanatic", Plato as "boring", Mill as a "blockhead", and of Spinoza, he asked: "How much of personal timidity and vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray?"[220]He likewise expressed contempt for the English novelistGeorge Eliot.[221]
Nietzsche's philosophy, while innovative and revolutionary, was indebted to many predecessors. While at Basel, Nietzsche lectured on pre-Platonic philosophers for several years, and the text of this lecture series has been characterised as a "lost link" in the development of his thought. "In it, concepts such as the will to power, the eternal return of the same, the overman, gay science, self-overcoming and so on receive rough, unnamed formulations and are linked to specific pre-Platonic, especially Heraclitus, who emerges as a pre-Platonic Nietzsche."[222]Thepre-SocraticphilosopherHeraclituswas known for rejecting the concept ofbeingas a constant and eternal principle of the universe and embracing "flux" and incessant change. His symbolism of the world as "child play" marked by amoral spontaneity and lack of definite rules was appreciated by Nietzsche.[223]Due to his Heraclitean sympathies, Nietzsche was also a vociferous critic ofParmenides, who, in contrast to Heraclitus, viewed the world as a single, unchanging Being.[224]
In hisEgotism in German Philosophythe philosopherGeorge Santayanaclaimed that Nietzsche's whole philosophy was a reaction to Schopenhauer. Santayana wrote that Nietzsche's work was "an emendation of that of Schopenhauer. The will to live would become the will to dominate; pessimism founded on reflection would become optimism founded on courage; the suspense of the will in contemplation would yield to a more biological account of intelligence and taste; finally in the place of pity and asceticism (Schopenhauer's two principles of morals) Nietzsche would set up the duty of asserting the will at all costs and being cruelly but beautifully strong. These points of difference from Schopenhauer cover the whole philosophy of Nietzsche."[225][226]
The superficial similarity of Nietzsche'sÜbermenschtoThomas Carlyle's Hero as well as both authors' rhetorical prose style has led to speculation concerning the degree to which Nietzsche might have been influenced by his reading of Carlyle.[227][228][229][230]G. K. Chestertonbelieved that "Out of [Carlyle] flows most of the philosophy of Nietzsche", qualifying his statement by adding that they were "profoundly different" in character.[231]Ruth apRobertshas shown that Carlyle anticipated Nietzsche in asserting the importance of metaphor (with Nietzsche's metaphor-fiction theory "appear[ing] to owe something to Carlyle"), announcing the death of God, and recognising both Goethe'sEntsagen(renunciation) andNovalis'sSelbsttödtung(self-annihilation) as prerequisites for engaging in philosophy. apRoberts writes that "Nietzsche and Carlyle had the same German sources, but Nietzsche may owe more to Carlyle than he cares to admit", noting that "[Nietzsche] takes the trouble to repudiate Carlyle with malicious emphasis."[232]Ralph Jessop,senior lecturerat theUniversity of Glasgow, argues a reassessment of Carlyle's influence on Nietzsche is "long-overdue".[233]
Nietzsche expressed admiration for 17th-century French moralists such asFrançois de La Rochefoucauld,Jean de La BruyèreandLuc de Clapiers, marquis de Vauvenargues,[234]as well as forStendhal.[235]TheorganicismofPaul Bourgetinfluenced Nietzsche,[236]as did that ofRudolf VirchowandAlfred Espinas.[237]In 1867 Nietzsche wrote in a letter that he was trying to improve his German style of writing with the help ofGotthold Ephraim Lessing,Georg Christoph Lichtenbergand Schopenhauer. It was probably Lichtenberg (along withPaul Rée) whose aphoristic style of writing contributed to Nietzsche's own use ofaphorism.[238]Nietzsche early learned ofDarwinismthroughFriedrich Albert Lange.[239]The essays ofRalph Waldo Emersonhad a profound influence on Nietzsche, who "loved Emerson from first to last",[240]wrote "Never have I felt so much at home in a book", and called him "[the] author who has been richest in ideas in this century so far".[241]Hippolyte Taineinfluenced Nietzsche's view onJean-Jacques RousseauandNapoleon.[242]Notably, he also read some of the posthumous works ofCharles Baudelaire,[243]Leo Tolstoy'sMy Religion,Ernest Renan'sLife of Jesus, andFyodor Dostoevsky'sDemons.[243][244]Nietzsche called Dostoevsky "the only psychologist from whom I have anything to learn".[245]While Nietzsche never mentionsMax Stirner, the similarities in their ideas have prompted a minority of interpreters to suggesta relationship between the two.[246][247][248][249][250][251][252]
In 1861 Nietzsche wrote an enthusiastic essay on his "favourite poet",Friedrich Hölderlin, mostly forgotten at that time.[253]He also expressed deep appreciation forAdalbert Stifter'sIndian Summer,[254]Lord Byron'sManfredandMark Twain'sTom Sawyer.[255]
A translation byLouis Jacolliotof the Calcutta version of the ancientHindu texttheManusmritiwas reviewed by Nietzsche. He commented on it both favourably and unfavourably:

## Reception and legacy
Nietzsche's works did not reach a wide readership during his active writing career. In 1888 the influential Danish criticGeorg Brandesaroused considerable excitement about Nietzsche through a series of lectures he gave at theUniversity of Copenhagen. In the years after Nietzsche's death in 1900, his works became better known, and readers have responded to them in complex and sometimes controversial ways.[17]Many Germans eventually discovered his appeals for greaterindividualismand personality development inThus Spoke Zarathustra, but responded to them divergently. He had some following among left-wing Germans in the 1890s; in 1894–1895 German conservatives wanted to ban his work assubversive. During the late 19th century Nietzsche's ideas were commonly associated with anarchist movements and appear to have had influence within them, particularly in France, Germany,[261]Britain and the United States.[262][263][264]Gustav Landaueris credited with the most in-depth appreciation and critique of Nietzsche's ideas from an anarchist perspective.[265]H.L. Menckenproduced the first book on Nietzsche in English in 1907,The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, and in 1910 a book of translated paragraphs from Nietzsche, increasing knowledge of his philosophy in the United States.[266]Nietzsche is known today as a precursor toexistentialism,post-structuralismandpostmodernism.[267]
W. B. YeatsandArthur Symonsdescribed Nietzsche as the intellectual heir toWilliam Blake.[268]Symons went on to compare the ideas of the two thinkers inThe Symbolist Movement in Literature, while Yeats tried to raise awareness of Nietzsche in Ireland.[269][270][271]A similar notion was espoused byW. H. Audenwho wrote of Nietzsche in hisNew Year Letter(released in 1941 inThe Double Man): "O masterlydebunkerof our liberal fallacies ... all your life you stormed, like your English forerunner Blake."[272][273][274]Nietzsche made an impact on composers during the 1890s. The writerDonald Mitchellnoted thatGustav Mahlerwas "attracted to the poetic fire of Zarathustra, but repelled by the intellectual core of its writings". He also quoted Mahler himself, and adds that he was influenced by Nietzsche's conception and affirmative approach to nature, which Mahler presented in hisThird SymphonyusingZarathustra's roundelay.Frederick Deliusproduced a piece of choral music,A Mass of Life, based on a text ofThus Spoke Zarathustra, whileRichard Strauss(who also based hisAlso sprach Zarathustraon the same book), was only interested in finishing "another chapter of symphonic autobiography".[275]Writers and poets influenced by Nietzsche includeAndré Gide,[276]August Strindberg,[277]Robinson Jeffers,[278]Pío Baroja,[279]D. H. Lawrence,[280]Edith Södergran[281]andYukio Mishima.[282]
Nietzsche was an early influence on the poetry ofRainer Maria Rilke.[283]Knut Hamsuncounted Nietzsche, along withStrindbergand Dostoyevsky, as his primary influences.[284]The authorJack Londonwrote that he was more stimulated by Nietzsche than by any other writer.[285]Critics have suggested that the character of David Grief inA Son of the Sunwas based on Nietzsche.[286]Nietzsche's influence onMuhammad Iqbalis most evidenced inAsrar-i Khudi(The Secrets of the Self).[287]Wallace Stevens[288]was another reader of Nietzsche, and elements of Nietzsche's philosophy were found throughout Stevens's poetry collectionHarmonium.[289][290]Olaf Stapledonwas influenced by the idea of theÜbermenschand it is a central theme in his booksOdd JohnandSirius.[291]In Russia, Nietzsche influencedRussian symbolism[292]and figures such asDmitry Merezhkovsky,[293]Andrei Bely,[294]Vyacheslav IvanovandAlexander Scriabinincorporated or discussed parts of Nietzsche philosophy in their works.Thomas Mann's novelDeath in Venice[295]shows a use of Apollonian and Dionysian, and inDoctor FaustusNietzsche was a central source for the character of Adrian Leverkühn.[296][297]Hermann Hesse, similarly, in hisNarcissus and Goldmundpresents two main characters as opposite yet intertwined Apollonian and Dionysian spirits. The painterGiovanni Segantiniwas fascinated byThus Spoke Zarathustra, and he drew an illustration for the first Italian translation of the book. The Russian painterLena Hadescreated the oil painting cycleAlso Sprach Zarathustradedicated to the bookThus Spoke Zarathustra.[298]
By the time of theFirst World WarNietzsche had acquired a reputation as an inspiration for right-wing Germanmilitarismand leftist politics. German soldiers received copies ofThus Spoke Zarathustraas gifts during World War I.[299][300]TheDreyfus affairprovided a contrasting example of his reception: the French antisemitic Right labelled the Jewish and leftist intellectuals who defendedAlfred Dreyfusas "Nietzscheans".[301]Nietzschehad a distinct appealfor manyZionistthinkers around the start of the 20th century, most notable beingAhad Ha'am,[302]Hillel Zeitlin,[303]Micha Josef Berdyczewski,A.D. Gordon[304]andMartin Buber, who went so far as to extol Nietzsche as a "creator" and "emissary of life".[305]Chaim Weizmann, the firstpresident of Israel, was a great admirer of Nietzsche; he sent Nietzsche's books to his wife, adding a comment in a letter that "This was the best and finest thing I can send to you."[306]Israel Eldad, the ideological chief of theStern Gangthat fought the British inPalestinein the 1940s, wrote about Nietzsche in his underground newspaper and later translated most of Nietzsche's books intoHebrew.[307]Eugene O'Neillremarked thatZarathustrainfluenced him more than any other book he ever read. He also shared Nietzsche's view oftragedy.[308]The playsThe Great God BrownandLazarus Laughedare examples of Nietzsche's influence on him.[309][310][311]TheFirst Internationalclaimed Nietzsche as ideologically one of their own.[312]From 1888 through the 1890s there were more publications of Nietzsche works in Russia than in any other country.[313]Nietzsche was influential among the Bolsheviks. Among the Nietzschean Bolsheviks wereVladimir Bazarov,[314]Anatoly Lunacharsky[315]andAleksandr Bogdanov.[316]Nietzsche's influence on the works of theFrankfurt SchoolphilosophersMax HorkheimerandTheodor W. Adorno[317]can be seen in theDialectic of Enlightenment. Adorno encapsulated Nietzsche's philosophy as expressing the "humane in a world in which humanity has become a sham".[318]
Nietzsche's growing prominence suffered a severe setback when his works became closely associated withAdolf HitlerandNazi Germany. Many political leaders of the twentieth century were at least superficially familiar with Nietzsche's ideas, although it is not always possible to determine whether they actually read his work. It is debated among scholars whether Hitler read Nietzsche, although if he did, it may not have been extensively.[f][g][319][320]He was a frequent visitor to the Nietzsche museum in Weimar and used expressions of Nietzsche's, such as "lords of the earth" inMein Kampf.[321]The Nazis made selective use of Nietzsche's philosophy.Alfred Baeumlerwas perhaps the most notable exponent of Nietzschean thought in Nazi Germany. Baeumler had published his book "Nietzsche, Philosopher and Politician" in 1931, before the Nazis' rise to power, and subsequently published several editions of Nietzsche's work during the Third Reich.[322][323]Benito Mussolini,[324][325]Charles de Gaulle[326]andHuey P. Newton[327]read Nietzsche.Richard Nixon, the 37thpresident of the United States, read Nietzsche with "curious interest", and his bookBeyond Peacemight have taken its title from Nietzsche's bookBeyond Good and Evil, which Nixon read beforehand.[328]Bertrand Russellwrote that Nietzsche had exerted great influence on philosophers and on people of literary and artistic culture, but warned that the attempt to put Nietzsche's philosophy of aristocracy into practice could only be done by an organisation similar to the Fascist or the Nazi Party.[329]
A decade after the Second World War there was a revival of Nietzsche's philosophical writings thanks to translations and analyses byWalter KaufmannandR.J. Hollingdale.Georges Bataillewas also influential in this revival, defending Nietzsche against appropriation by the Nazis with his notable 1937 essay "Nietzsche and Fascists".[330]Others, well known philosophers in their own right, wrote commentaries on Nietzsche's philosophy, includingMartin Heidegger, who produced a four-volume study, andLev Shestov, who wrote a book calledDostoyevski, Tolstoy and Nietzsche, in which he portrays Nietzsche and Dostoevsky as the "thinkers of tragedy".[331]Georg Simmelcompares Nietzsche's importance to ethics to that ofNicolaus Copernicusforcosmology.[332]The sociologistFerdinand Tönniesread Nietzsche avidly from his early life, and later frequently discussed many of his concepts in his own works. Nietzsche has influenced philosophers such asMartin Heidegger,Jean-Paul Sartre,[333]Oswald Spengler,[334]George Grant,[335]Emil Cioran,[336]Albert Camus,[337]Ayn Rand,[338]Jacques Derrida,[339]Sarah Kofman,[340]Leo Strauss,[341]Max Scheler,Michel Foucault,[342]Bernard Williams[343]andNick Land.[344]
Camus described Nietzsche as "the only artist to have derived the extreme consequences of an aesthetics of theabsurd".[345]Paul Ricœurcalled Nietzsche one of the masters of the "school of suspicion", alongsideKarl Marxand Sigmund Freud.[346]Carl Jungwas also influenced by Nietzsche.[347]InMemories, Dreams, Reflections, a biography transcribed by his secretary, he cites Nietzsche as a large influence.[348]Aspects of Nietzsche's philosophy, especially his ideas of the self and his relation to society, run through much of late-twentieth and early twenty-first century thought.[349][350]Nietzsche's writings have also been influential to some advancers ofAccelerationistthought through his influence onDeleuze and Guattari.[351]His deepening of the romantic-heroic tradition of the nineteenth century, for example, as expressed in the ideal of the "grand striver" appears in the work of thinkers fromCornelius CastoriadistoRoberto Mangabeira Unger.[352]For Nietzsche, this grand striver overcomes obstacles, engages in epic struggles, pursues new goals, embraces recurrent novelty, and transcends existing structures and contexts.[349]: 195