## Golden Globes
TheGolden Globesare awards presented for excellence in international film and television. It is an annualaward ceremonyheld since1944to honor artists, professionals, and their work. The ceremony is normally held every January, and has been a major part of the film industry'sawards season, which culminates each year in theAcademy Awards. The eligibility period for Golden Globes extends from January 1 through December 31. The Golden Globes were not televised in1969–1972,1979, and2022. The2008ceremony was canceled due to the2007–08 Writers Guild of America strike, while the 2022 ceremony was downsized to a non-televised gala due to a lack of broadcasters.
The ceremony was originally established and organized by theHollywood Foreign Press Association(HFPA), a group representing international journalists covering the United States' entertainment industry. In 2022, amid criticism and boycotts of the HFPA over aspects of its operations (including a lack of diversity in its membership), interim CEOTodd Boehlyannounced that the Golden Globe Awards would be reformed as a for-profit entity under his investment firmEldridge Industries(the parent company ofDick Clark Productions, which had produced the Golden Globes since 1993), and that a new non-profit entity would be formed to continue the HFPA's philanthropic activities. The restructuring took effect on June 12, 2023, with the Golden Globes being acquired by Dick Clark Productions, and the HFPA's philanthropic activities transitioned to theGolden Globe Foundation.

## History
TheHollywood Foreign Press Association(HFPA) was founded in 1943 as the Hollywood Foreign Correspondent Association (HFCA) byLos Angeles–based foreignjournalistsseeking to develop a better-organized process of gathering and distributing cinema news to non-U.S. markets.[2][3][4][5]One of the organization's first major endeavors was to establish a ceremony similar to theAcademy Awardsto honor film achievements. The1st Golden Globe Awardsceremony, honoring the best achievements in1943 filmmaking, was held in January 1944, at the20th Century-Foxstudios. Subsequent ceremonies were held at various venues throughout the next decade, includingthe Beverly Hills Hoteland theHollywood Roosevelt Hotel.

## Foreign Press Association of Hollywood's Henrietta Awards
In 1950, some of the journalists in the HFCA broke away to form the Foreign Press Association of Hollywood (FPAH). It was the FPAH that instituted the Henrietta Award for World Film Favorite, which was subsequently given out by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, the new name for the organization when the FPAH and HFCA merged in 1955, minus the "Henrietta" name through 1980 (for the 1979 movie year).[2]
The FPAH held its first World Film Favorite Festival on January 27, 1951, giving out Henrietta Awards in various categories. The award, an angel above a globe raised on four tall pillars, was named for the president of the FPAH, Henry Gris. Winners of the Henrietta for World Film Favorite wereGregory PeckandJane Wyman. At the FPAH's second World Film Favorite Festival held January 26, 1952, the Henrietta was a large statuette of a naked woman holding a flower. Based on an international poll of 900 newspapers, magazines and radio stations,Alan LaddandEsther Williamswere presented the gold Henrietta for World Favorites. while silver Henriettas for "Best Young Box Office Personality" were presented toLeslie Caron,Tony Curtis,John Derek,Mitzi Gaynor,Marilyn MonroeandPatrice Wymore. At the third festival held on February 14, 1953,John WayneandSusan Haywardwon the gold Henriettas.[2]
The HFCA continued to hold their Golden Globe Awards. In 1950, the HFCA had established a special honorary award to recognize outstanding contributions to the entertainment industry. Recognizing its subject as an international figure within the entertainment industry, the first award was presented to director and producerCecil B. DeMille. The official name of the award thus became theCecil B. DeMille Award.[6]
In January 1954, the two organizations held a joint ceremony, and the following year, they merged under the new Hollywood Foreign Press Association name. The Henrietta Award was terminated, but the HFPA instituted a special award called World Film Favorite, a Golden Globe surmounted by an angel. Similar to the Henrietta Award for World Film Favorite, the winner of the new HFPA Golden Globe was determined by a worldwide poll conducted byReuters. This award, sometimes referred to as The Henrietta Award, was given out through 1980 for the 1979, movie year, when it was terminated.[2]

## Post-merger
The13th Golden Globe Awardsheld in February 1956 saw the first Golden Globe in Television Achievement. The first three permanent television award categories,Best TV Series,Best TV Actor, andBest TV Actress, then made their debuts during the19th Golden Globe Awardsheld in March 1962.
Beginning in 1963, the trophies commenced to be handed out by one or more persons referred to as "Miss Golden Globe", a title renamed on January 5, 2018, to "Golden Globe Ambassador". The holders of the position were, traditionally, the daughters or sometimes the sons of a celebrity, and as a point of pride, these often continued to be contested among celebrity parents.[7]
In 2009, the Golden Globe statuette was redesigned (but not for the first time in its history). The New York firmSociety Awardscollaborated for a year with the HFPA to produce a statuette that included a unique marble and enhanced the statuette's quality and gold content. It was unveiled at a press conference at theBeverly Hiltonprior to the show.[8]
TheCarol Burnett Awardwas created as a television counterpart to the Cecil B. DeMille Award, named after its first recipient in 2019, actress and comedianCarol Burnett.[9]

## Revenues from award broadcast
Revenues generated from the annual ceremony have enabled the HFPA to donate millions of dollars to entertainment-related charities, as well as funding scholarships and other programs for future film and television professionals. The most prominent beneficiary is theYoung Artist Awards, presented annually by theYoung Artist Foundation, established in 1978 by Hollywood Foreign Press memberMaureen Dragone, to recognize and award excellence of youngHollywoodperformers under the age of 21 and to provide scholarships for young artists who may be physically or financially challenged.[10][11][12]

## 2022 boycott, acquisition by Dick Clark Productions
In 2021, the HFPA faced criticism for the lack ofBlackrepresentation among its members.[13]On May 3, 2021, the HFPA announced plans for a reform package, including a 50% increase in members over the next 18 months, as well as new positions, term limits, and practices to improve its accountability.[14]However,Time's Upand a group of 100 PR firms criticized the lack of given timelines for filling some of the new management positions, arguing that they would not be completed soon enough to have any material impact on the cycle of the upcoming79th Golden Globe Awardsin January 2022. Time's Up further argued that the package "largely contains no specifics" nor "commitments to real accountability or change".[15]
On May 7, 2021, bothAmazon StudiosandNetflixannounced that they would stop their activities with the HFPA until sufficient actions on reforms are made.[16][17]Other media companies followed suit on May 10,[18]includingNBC, who announced that it would not televise the79th Golden Globe Awards, but that it would be open to televising the ceremony in 2023 if the HFPA were successful in its efforts to reform.[19]WarnerMedia also boycotted the HFPA,[18]whileTom Cruisereturned the awards he had won forBorn on the Fourth of July,Jerry MaguireandMagnoliain solidarity.[20]
Following these events, the HFPA released a timeline for its reforms, which would see the process completed by the week of August 2.[21]On October 1, the HFPA released a list of 21 new members that it had recruited under these reforms, and namedTodd Boehly(owner of ceremony producer Dick Clark Productions) as its "interim CEO".[22][23]The HFPA then announced on October 15 that it still planned to hold the 79th Golden Globe Awards on January 9, 2022, with or without another media partner.[24]With the televised absence of the Golden Globe Awards from NBC, theCritics Choice Associationattempted to shift theirCritics' Choice Movie Awardsceremony up a week to fill the void and increase their overall prestige, though it was later delayed due toSARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant.[25][26]The 79th ceremony was conducted as a non-televised, private presentation, with limited guests (particularly beneficiaries of the HFPA's philanthropic activities) and strict COVID-19 protocol due to Omicron variant.[27]
In July 2022, the HFPA approved a major restructuring, under which Boehly would establish a for-profit entity via his holding companyEldridge Industries(owner ofDick Clark Productions—which has produced the Golden Globes' telecast since 1993,[28]as well as the entertainment trade publicationThe Hollywood Reporter)[29]that will hold the Golden Globe Awards' intellectual property and oversee the "professionalization and modernization" of the ceremony, including "[increasing] the size and diversity of the available voters for the annual awards". The HFPA's philanthropic activities were to continue separately as a non-profit entity.[30][31]NBC subsequently agreed to a one-year contract to air the80th Golden Globe Awardson January 10, 2023,[32]which were moved to a Tuesday evening to avoid conflicting with theNational Football League(whose regular season was recently extended into January) and theCollege Football Playoff National Championship(which was being hosted atSoFi Stadiumin Inglewood).[33]
On June 12, 2023, the Golden Globe Awards' assets and intellectual property were acquired by DCP (whose ownership includesPenske Media Corporation, owner of fellow entertainment publicationsDeadline HollywoodandVariety) and Eldridge; the financial details of the purchase were not disclosed. The HFPA's philanthropic activities were transferred to a new entity known as theGolden Globe Foundation.[1][34][35]

## Podcasts added in 2026
For the 2026 awards the Golden Globes added a new category for Best Podcast, citing the 'seismic' growth of the medium. The inaugural award was won byAmy Poehlerfor her weekly show,Good Hang with Amy Poehler.[36]

## Eligibility
The qualifying eligibility period for all nominations is the calendar year from January 1 through December 31.[37]
Voice-over performances and cameo appearances in which persons play themselves are not eligible from all film and TV acting categories.
Films must be at least 70 minutes and released for at least a seven-day run in theGreater Los Angeles area, starting prior to midnight on December 31. Films can be released in theaters, onpay-per-view, or by digital delivery.[37]
For theBest Foreign Language Filmcategory, films do not need to be released in the United States. At least 51 percent of the dialogue must be in a language other than English, and they must first be released in their country of origin during a 14-month period from November 1 to December 31 prior to the Awards. However, if a film was not released in its country of origin due to censorship, it can still qualify if it had a one-week release in the United States during the qualifying calendar year. There is no limit to the number of submitted films from a given country.[37]
A TV program must air in the United States between theprime timehours of 8 p.m. and 11 p.m. (or 7 p.m. and 11 p.m. on Sundays). A show can air onbroadcast television, on basic or premium cable, or by digital delivery; it does not qualify if it is only on pay-per-view or via digital delivery of film. Also, a TV show must either be made in the United States or be a co-production financially and creatively between an American and a foreign production company. Furthermore,realityand non-scripted shows are disqualified.[37]
A film cannot be entered in both the film and TV categories, and instead should be entered based on its original release format. If it was first aired on American television, then it can be entered into the TV categories. If it was released in theaters or on pay-per-view, then it should instead be entered into the film categories. A film festival showing does not count towards disqualifying what would otherwise be a TV program.[37]
Actors in a TV series must appear in at least six episodes during the qualifying calendar year. Actors in a TV film or miniseries must appear in at least five percent of the time in that TV film or miniseries.[37]

## Nominations and voting
Entry forms for films need to be received within ten days of the official screening. TV programs should be submitted "as early as possible" before the deadline.[37]For TV programs, they must merely be available to be seen by voters in any common format, including the original TV broadcast.
As of the 2023 ceremony, the HFPA removed a requirement that an exclusive press conference be hosted by the organization for each nominated film—a practice that had contributed to transparency issues.[38]
Ballots to select the nominations are sent to voters in November, along with a "Reminder List" of eligible film and TV programs.[39]Each HFPA member then votes for their top five choices in each category, numbering them 5 to 1, with 5 being their top choice. The nominees in each category are then the five selections that receive the most votes. Theranked votingis only used to break ties, with number 5 worth 5 points, number 4 worth 4 points, and so on.[37]
After the nominations are announced on the second Monday of December, voters receive the final ballots.[39]The winner in each category is selected from among the nominees byplurality voting. In case of a tie, the winner is the one that had the most votes on the nomination ballot.[37]
As of the 2024 ceremony, the voting body consisted of 310 individuals, including representatives of 76 countries' journalists, and 95 members that were members of the HFPA.[40][41]

## Ceremony
The broadcast of the Golden Globe Awards, broadcast to 167 countries worldwide, generally ranks as the third most-watched awards show each year, behind only theOscarsand theGrammy Awards. Since 2010, it was televised live in all United States time zones. UntilRicky Gervaishosted in 2010, the award ceremony was one of two majorHollywoodaward ceremonies (the other being theScreen Actors Guild Awards) that did not have a regular host; every year a different presenter introduced the ceremony at the beginning of the broadcast. Gervais returned to host the 68th and 69th Golden Globe Awards the next two years.[42][43]Tina FeyandAmy Poehlerhosted the 70th, 71st and 72nd Golden Globe Awards in 2013 through 2015.[42]The Golden Globe Awards' theme song, which debuted in 2012, was written by Japanese musician and composerYoshiki.[44]

## Broadcasting
The HFPA had previously held a lucrative broadcasting agreement withNBC,[45]which began televising the Golden Globes ceremony locally in Los Angeles in 1958, then nationally in 1964. However, in 1968, theFederal Communications Commission(FCC) claimed the show "misled the public as to how the winners were determined" (allegations included that winners were determined by lobby; to motivate winners to show up to the awards ceremony winners were informed if they did not attend another winner would be named). The FCC admonished NBC for participating in the scandal. Subsequently, NBC refused to broadcast the ceremony from 1968 until after 1974.[46][47]
Since 1993,Dick Clark Productions(DCP) had produced the ceremony with NBC as a broadcaster; DCP's involvement came at a time of instability for the Golden Globes, including reduced credibility and having lost its contract withCBS(the interim period saw it contract with cable networkTBSto air the ceremony).[28]Enthusiastic overClark's commitment, the HFPA's contract contained an unusual provision granting DCP the role of producer in perpetuity, provided that it continued to maintain a broadcast rights agreement with NBC.[48]
Due to threats of writers picketing the event as part of the ongoingWriters Guild of America strike, the65th Golden Globe Awardsceremony was cancelled and replaced by an hour-long press conference to announce the winners. While NBC sought to be the exclusive broadcaster of the press conference, NBC faced conflicts with the HFPA and Dick Clark Productions over the proposed coverage, including a demand for a rights fee, and concerns over plans to haveBilly BushandNancy O'Dellof NBC'ssyndicatedentertainment news programAccess Hollywoodserve as presenters. The HFPA subsequently announced that it would not restrict coverage of the press conference by other broadcasters.[49]E!andTV Guide Network(who were typically known for red carpet coverage from major awards shows) both aired coverage of the press conference, as well asCNN.[50][51]NBC declined to air the conference itself; the ceremony timeslot was filled by aDateline NBCpreview special, an hour-long results special hosted by Bush and O'Dell, and anAccess Hollywoodpost-show also hosted by Bush and O'Dell.[52][53][54]
In 2010, Dick Clark Productions reached an extension with NBC through 2018. However, the deal was negotiated without the HFPA's knowledge. The HFPA sued DCP over the deal, as well as claims that the company was attempting to sell digital rights that it did not hold; the HFPA had wanted a new contract that would grant them a larger share of revenue from the telecast.[48]In April 2012, judgeHoward Matzupheld the NBC perpetuity clause and ruled in favor of DCP, noting that the HFPA had a history of "unbusinesslike display[s] of misplaced priorities" and "[succumbing] to bouts of pronounced turmoil and personal feuds", in contrast to DCP, which had been "represented by one experienced executive who was adept at dealing fairly and effectively with the often amateurish conduct of HFPA." Matz pointed out examples of the HFPA's enthusiasm over the relationship and their desire to "not get cancelled", such as having disregarded its own bylaws by approving an extension in 2001 without a formal vote. The case was taken to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.[48]
In 2014, Dick Clark Productions and the HFPA reached a settlement; details were not released, but DCP committed to continue its role as producer through at least the end of its current contract with NBC, and to work with the HFPA to "expand the brand with unique and exciting entertainment experiences". NBC held a right of first refusal to renew its contract beyond 2018, but bidding was to be open to other broadcasters;[55][56]in September 2018, NBC agreed to renew its rights to the Golden Globes through 2027, maintaining the current broadcast arrangement and the involvement of Dick Clark Productions.[57][58]
In 2019 and 2020, NBC televised the late Sunday afternoonNational Football League(NFL) playoff game (which had historically gone to another NFL broadcaster) as a lead-in to the Golden Globes. Because of the large viewership of NFL playoff games, this was intended to boost the Golden Globes' television ratings, which dropped 11% between 2017 and 2018.[59]If the game ever went long, NBC planned to still air the Golden Globes in its entirety on abroadcast delay.[60]The 2021 ceremony was then postponed to February 28 due to theimpact of the COVID-19 pandemic on cinemaandon television, avoiding the NFL season altogether.[61]
Per the aforementioned2022 boycott, NBC declined to air the 2022 ceremony,[19]then signed a one-year deal to televise the 2023 ceremony, moving it to a Tuesday evening to avoid conflicting withSunday Night Footballand the2023 College Football Playoff National Championship.[33]In November 2023, DCP announced a one-year agreement to air the 81st ceremony on CBS and streaming onParamount+, with the ceremony following CBS's afternoonNFL coverage.[62]In March 2024, DCP announced a five-year agreement with CBS to continue airing the Golden Globes; the agreement also includes rights to the DCP-producedAmerican Music Awardsbeginning in 2025, which had gone on hiatus after2022when its contract withABCexpired.[63]In September 2025, it was announced that CBS would air an additional Golden Globes special—Golden Eve— on the Thursday prior to the ceremony, which will highlight the recipients of the Cecil B. DeMille and Carol Burnett lifetime achievement awards, and feature highlights from the previously non-televised gala.[64]

## Scandals and criticism
Since the late 1950s, the HFPA had been racked by scandals and controversies. The organization had been criticized for the small size of its membership, the quality of the members, its exclusion of serious cinema journalists, and their closeness to the movie industry and stars. The Golden Globes under the HFPA were also accused of being bought or bartered, with the HFPA's members having been easily swayed by high-priced gifts andaccessoffered by studios, production companies, and stars.[162][163][164][165]

## Henry Gris resignation
Former HFPA president Henry Gris resigned from the board in 1958 claiming that "certain awards are being given more or less as  favors" with others querying why so many winners were represented by one public relations firm.[42][166]

## FCC broadcast ban
The FCC imposed a ban on NBC's broadcast of the Golden Globes after the February 1968 ceremony.Movie criticRex Reed, in a contemporary article about the broadcast, wrote:
NBC's telcast of the Foreign Press Association's25th annual Golden Globe Awardshad to be seen to be disbelieved. The Federal Communications Commission have sent lawyers to have it investigated. But award-giving, pointless as it is, is still big business, and it also gives viewers a chance to see their favorite stars make fools of themselves in public, so the Golden Globes were back, minus some of their sponsors, who backed out at the last minute....
Just last weekNewsweekreported denials from the Foreign Press Association that its members give awards to the stars who throw the biggest feeds. "We are not influenced by a glass of champagne," snapped [HFPA President Howard] Luft, "Kirk Douglasthrew a party last year, and what did he win? Nothing."
This year there was even a special category called the Cecil B. DeMille Humanitarian Award. Who won? You guessed it. Kirk Douglas.[167]
The FCC was spurred to action because the public had been misled as to how the awards were actually made. Golden Globe broadcast advertisers determined Golden Globe winners and the HFPA pressured nominees to attend the award ceremony by threatening to award the Golden Globe won by a non-attendee to a losing nominee who was at the ceremony. The ban lasted until 1974.[163]
After the ban, NBC once again broadcast the awards ceremony, but it terminated its contract with the HFPA after the Pia Zadora scandal of 1982 (see below).[163]

## Pia Zadora awarded "New Star of the Year in a Motion Picture" in 1982
In1982,Pia Zadorawon a Golden Globe in the category "New Star of the Year in a Motion Picture" for her performance inButterfly, over such competition asElizabeth McGovern(Ragtime) andKathleen Turner(Body Heat).[168]Accusations were made that the Foreign Press Association members had been bought off.[169]Zadora's husband, multimillionaireMeshulam Riklis, flew voting members to his casino, theRiviera HotelinLas Vegas, which gave the appearance that they voted for Zadora to repay this. Riklis also invited voting members to his house for a lavish lunch and a showing of the film. He also spent a great deal on advertising.[170][171]Furthermore, Zadora had made her film debut some 17 years earlier as a child performer inSanta Claus Conquers the Martians.[172]

## 2011 payola charges
In 2011, three days before the Golden Globe Awards telecast, publicist Michael Russell filed a $2 million lawsuit alleging that HFPA President Philip Berk terminated Russell and his partner's contract after the 2010 broadcast because they raised ethical concerns overpayolawith him, including allegations that HFPA members took bribes for nominations and awards. The lawsuit alleged that HFPA members "abuse their positions and engage in unethical and potentially unlawful deals and arrangements which amount to a 'payola' scheme." The HFPA denied the allegations, claiming they were fabrications made up by a disgruntled ex-employee.[173]The lawsuit was later settled.

## BurlesqueandThe Touristfor Best Musical/Comedy nominations in 2011
The nominations for the2011 Golden Globesdrew initial skepticism, as the Hollywood Foreign Press Association nominatedThe Touristin its Best Musical/Comedy categories, even though it was originally advertised as aspy thriller, along with being one of the most panned films of the season.  HostRicky Gervaiseven jokingly asked the main star of the film,Johnny Depp, if he had seen it. Depp's co-starAngelina Joliereportedly had personally lobbied HFPA members, resulting in a nomination in a category the film did not belong in.[165]Rumors then surfaced that Sony, the distributor ofThe Tourist, had influenced Globes voters with an all-expenses-paid trip toLas Vegas, culminating in a concert byCher.[174][175]The lobbying by Sony also resulted in a Best Musical/Comedy nod for Cher's badly-reviewed movieBurlesque.[165]

## Asian films excluded from Best Motion Picture categories
In 2020, the HFPA received widespread criticism for nominating Asian and Asian American films, such asThe Farewell,Parasite, andMinari, for Best Foreign Language Film while excluding them from the Best Motion Picture categories.  The decision to categorizeMinarias a foreign language film, despite having an exclusively American production team and setting, was heavily condemned by many actors and filmmakers of Asian descent.[176][177]While HFPA rules stipulate that a film must have at least 50% English dialogue to be nominated for the Best Drama or Comedy/Musical categories, critics noted that the filmsInglourious BasterdsandBabeldid not meet the 50% threshold but were still nominated for the Best Motion Picture categories, prompting accusations ofanti-Asian racism.[176]

## Black representation
In the 2020s, the HFPA began to face criticism for the ethical standards of its operations—including allegations that the organization lacked accountability, and that there was a lack ofBlackrepresentation among its members.[178]Calls for reform in response to these issues resulted in the79th Golden Globe Awardsbeing boycotted by its broadcaster and other production companies; as a result, the ceremony was held as a non-televised, private event. A televised ceremony returned the following year.