## Gold
Goldis achemical element; itschemical symbolisAu(fromLatinaurum) andatomic number79. In its pure form, it is abright-metallic-yellow, dense, soft,malleable, andductilemetal. Chemically, gold is atransition metal, agroup 11 element, and one of thenoble metals. It is one of the leastreactivechemical elements, being the second lowest in thereactivity series, with onlyplatinumranked as less reactive.[10]Gold is solid understandard conditions.
Gold often occurs as thefree element(native state), asnuggetsor grains, inrocks,veins, andalluvial deposits. It occurs in asolid solutionseries with the native elementsilver(as inelectrum), naturallyalloyedwith other metals such ascopper, platinum, andpalladium, as well asmineral inclusionssuch as withinpyrite. Less commonly, it occurs in minerals as gold compounds, often withtellurium(gold tellurides).
Gold is resistant to most acids, though it does dissolve inaqua regia(a mixture ofnitric acidandhydrochloric acid), forming a solubletetrachloroaurateanion. Gold is insoluble in nitric acid alone, which dissolves silver andbase metals, a property long used torefinegold and confirm the presence of gold in metallic substances, giving rise to the term "acid test". Gold dissolves inalkalinesolutions ofcyanide, which are used inminingandelectroplating. Gold also dissolves inmercury, formingamalgamalloys, and as the gold acts simply as a solute, this is not achemical reaction.
A relatively rare element when compared to silver[11][12](though thirty times more common than platinum),[13]gold is aprecious metalthat has been used forcoinage,jewelry, and otherworks of artthroughoutrecorded history. In the past, agold standardwas often implemented as amonetary policy. Most gold coins ceased to be minted as a circulating currency in the 1930s, and the world gold standard was abandoned for afiat currencysystem after theNixon shockmeasures of 1971.
In 2023, theworld's largest gold producerwas China, followed by Russia and Australia.[14]As of 2020[update], a total of around 201,296tonnesof gold exist above ground.[15]If all of this gold were put together into a cube shape, each of its sides would measure 21.7 meters (71 ft). The world's consumption of new gold produced is about 50% in jewelry, 40% ininvestments, and 10% inindustry.[16]Gold's high malleability, ductility, resistance to corrosion and most other chemical reactions, as well as conductivity of electricity have led to its continued use in corrosion-resistantelectrical connectorsin all types of computerized devices (its chief industrial use). Gold is also used ininfraredshielding, the production ofcolored glass,gold leafing, andtooth restoration.Auranofinis a gold-containing drug used to treatrheumatoid arthritis.

## Etymology
Goldiscognatewith similar words in manyGermanic languages, deriving viaProto-Germanic*gulþąfromProto-Indo-European*ǵʰelh₃-'to shine, to gleam; to be yellow or green'.[17][18]
The symbolAuis from theLatinaurum'gold'.[19]The Proto-Indo-European ancestor ofaurumwas*h₂é-h₂us-o-, meaning'glow'. This word is derived from the sameroot(Proto-Indo-European*h₂u̯es-'to dawn') as*h₂éu̯sōs, the ancestor of the Latin wordaurora'dawn'.[20]This etymological relationship is presumably behind the frequent claim in scientific publications thataurummeant'shining dawn'.[21]

## Characteristics
Gold is the mostmalleablemetal. It can be drawn into awire of single-atom width, and then stretched considerably before it breaks.[22]Such nanowires distort via the formation, reorientation, and migration ofdislocationsandcrystal twinswithout noticeable hardening.[23]A single gram of gold can be beaten into a sheet of 1 square meter (11 sq ft), and anavoirdupois ounceinto 28 square meters (300 sq ft). Gold leaf can be beaten thin enough to become semi-transparent. Light transmitted through gold appears greenish-blue, because gold strongly reflects yellow and red.[24]Such semi-transparent sheets also strongly reflectinfraredlight, making them useful as infrared (radiant heat) shields in the visors of heat-resistant suits and in sun visors forspacesuits.[25]Gold is a goodconductor of heatandelectricity.
Gold has a density of 19.3 g/cm3, almost identical to that oftungstenat 19.25 g/cm3; as such, tungsten has been used in thecounterfeitingofgold bars, such as by plating a tungsten bar with gold.[26][27][28][29]By comparison, the density ofleadis 11.34 g/cm3, and that of the densest element,osmium, is22.588±0.015 g/cm3.[30]

## Color
Whereas most metals are gray or silvery white, gold is slightly reddish-yellow.[31]This color is a well-known example ofrelativistic quantum chemistry. The 5d-6s band gap is greatly reduced when relativity is included in theoretical calculations, and this is thought to account for the yellow color, although a full comparison of the absorption spectrum between the relativistic and non-relativistic cases has not been performed as of 2004.[32]Similar effects impart a golden hue to metalliccaesium.
Common colored gold alloys include the distinctive eighteen-karatrose goldcreated by the addition of copper. Alloys containingpalladiumornickelare also important in commercial jewelry as these produce white gold alloys. Fourteen-karat gold-copper alloy is nearly identical in color to certainbronzealloys, and both may be used to produce police and otherbadges. Fourteen- and eighteen-karat gold alloys with silver alone appear greenish-yellow and are referred to asgreen gold. Blue gold can be made by alloying withiron, and purple gold can be made by alloying withaluminium. Less commonly, addition ofmanganese,indium, and other elements can produce more unusual colors of gold for various applications.[33]
Colloidal gold, used by electron-microscopists, is red if the particles are small; larger particles of colloidal gold are blue.[34]

## Isotopes
Gold has only one stableisotope,197Au, which is also its only naturally occurring isotope, so gold is both amononuclidicandmonoisotopic element. Thirty-sixradioisotopeshave been synthesized, ranging inatomic massfrom 169 to 205. The most stable of these is195Auwith ahalf-lifeof 186.1 days. The least stable is171Au, which decays byproton emissionwith a half-life of 30 μs. Most of gold's radioisotopes with atomic masses below 197 decay by some combination ofproton emission,α decay, andβ+decay. The exceptions are195Au, which decays by electron capture, and196Au, which decays most often by electron capture (93%) with a minorβ−decaypath (7%).[35]All of gold's radioisotopes with atomic masses above 197 decay by β−decay.[36]
At least 32nuclear isomershave also been characterized, ranging in atomic mass from 170 to 200. Within that range, only178Au,180Au,181Au,182Au, and188Audo not have isomers. Gold's most stable isomer is198m2Auwith a half-life of 2.27 days. Gold's least stable isomer is177m2Auwith a half-life of only 7 ns.184m1Auhas three decay paths: β+decay,isomeric transition, and alpha decay. No other isomer or isotope of gold has three decay paths.[36]

## Synthesis
The possible production of gold from a more common element, such aslead, has long been a subject of human inquiry, and the ancient and medieval discipline ofalchemyoften focused on it; however, the transmutation of the chemical elements did not become possible until the understanding ofnuclear physicsin the 20th century. The first synthesis of gold was conducted by Japanese physicistHantaro Nagaoka, who synthesized gold frommercuryin 1924 by neutron bombardment.[37]An American team, working without knowledge of Nagaoka's prior study, conducted the same experiment in 1941, achieving the same result and showing that theisotopes of goldproduced by it were allradioactive.[38]In 1980,Glenn Seaborgtransmuted several thousand atoms of bismuth into gold at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory.[39][40]Gold can be manufactured in a nuclear reactor, but doing so is highly impractical and would cost far more than the value of the gold that is produced.[41]

## Chemistry
Although gold is the most noble of the noble metals,[42][43]it still forms many diverse compounds. Theoxidation stateof gold in its compounds ranges from −1 to +5, but Au(I) and Au(III) dominate its chemistry. Au(I), referred to as the aurous ion, is the most common oxidation state with softligandssuch asthioethers,thiolates, andorganophosphines. Au(I) compounds are typically linear. A good example isAu(CN)−2, which is the soluble form of gold encountered in mining. The binarygold halides, such asAuCl, form zigzag polymeric chains, again featuring linear coordination at Au. Mostdrugs based on goldare Au(I) derivatives.[44]
Au(III) (referred to as auric) is a common oxidation state, and is illustrated bygold(III) chloride,Au2Cl6. The gold atom centers in Au(III) complexes, like other d8compounds, are typicallysquare planar, withchemical bondsthat have bothcovalentandioniccharacter.Gold(I,III) chlorideis also known, an example of amixed-valence complex.
Gold does not react with oxygen at any temperature[45]and, up to 100 °C, is resistant to attack from ozone:[46]Au+O2⟶(no reaction){\displaystyle {\ce {Au + O2 ->}}({\text{no reaction}})}Au+O3→t<100∘C(no reaction){\displaystyle {\ce {Au{}+O3->[{\mathit {t}}<100^{\circ }{\text{C}}]}}({\text{no reaction}})}
Some freehalogensreact to form the corresponding gold halides.[47]Gold is strongly attacked by fluorine at dull-red heat[48]to formgold(III) fluorideAuF3. Powdered gold reacts with chlorine at 180 °C to formgold(III) chlorideAuCl3.[49]Gold reacts with bromine at 140 °C to form a combination ofgold(III) bromideAuBr3andgold(I) bromideAuBr, but reacts very slowly with iodine to formgold(I) iodideAuI:2Au+3F2→Δ2AuF3{\displaystyle {\ce {2 Au{}+ 3 F2 ->[\Delta] 2 AuF3}}}2Au+3Cl2→Δ2AuCl3{\displaystyle {\ce {2 Au{}+ 3 Cl2 ->[\Delta] 2 AuCl3}}}2Au+2Br2→ΔAuBr3+AuBr{\displaystyle {\ce {2 Au{}+ 2 Br2 ->[\Delta] AuBr3{}+ AuBr}}}2Au+I2→Δ2AuI{\displaystyle {\ce {2 Au{}+ I2 ->[\Delta] 2 AuI}}}
Gold does not react with sulfur directly,[50]butgold(III) sulfidecan be made by passinghydrogen sulfidethrough a dilute solution of gold(III) chloride orchlorauric acid.
Unlike sulfur, phosphorus reacts directly with gold at elevated temperatures to producegold phosphide(Au2P3).[51]
Gold readily dissolves inmercuryat room temperature to form anamalgam, and formsalloyswith many other metals at higher temperatures. These alloys can be produced to modify the hardness and other metallurgical properties, to controlmelting pointor to create exotic colors.[33]
Gold is unaffected by most acids. It does not react withhydrofluoric,hydrochloric,hydrobromic,hydriodic,sulfuric, ornitric acid. It does react withselenic acid, and is dissolved byaqua regia, a 1:3 mixture ofnitric acidandhydrochloric acid. Nitric acid oxidizes the metal to +3 ions, but only in minute amounts, typically undetectable in the pure acid because of the chemical equilibrium of the reaction. However, the ions are removed from the equilibrium by hydrochloric acid, formingAuCl−4ions, orchloroauric acid, thereby enabling further oxidation:2Au+6H2SeO4→200∘CAu2(SeO4)3+3H2SeO3+3H2O{\displaystyle {\ce {2Au{}+6H2SeO4->[200^{\circ }{\text{C}}]Au2(SeO4)3{}+3H2SeO3{}+3H2O}}}Au+4HCl+HNO3⟶HAuCl4+NO↑+2H2O{\displaystyle {\ce {Au{}+4HCl{}+HNO3->HAuCl4{}+NO\uparrow +2H2O}}}
Gold is similarly unaffected by most bases. It does not react withaqueous,solid, ormoltensodiumorpotassium hydroxide. It does, however, react withsodiumorpotassium cyanideunder alkaline conditions whenoxygenis present to form soluble complexes.[50]
Commonoxidation statesof gold include +1 (gold(I) or aurous compounds) and +3 (gold(III) or auric compounds). Gold ions in solution are readilyreducedandprecipitatedas metal by adding any other metal as thereducing agent. The added metal isoxidizedand dissolves, allowing the gold to be displaced from solution and be recovered as a solid precipitate.

## Rare oxidation states
Less common oxidation states of gold include −1, +2, and +5.
The −1 oxidation state occurs in aurides, compounds containing theAu−anion.Caesium auride(CsAu), for example, crystallizes in thecaesium chloridemotif;[52]rubidium, potassium, andtetramethylammoniumaurides are also known.[53]Gold has the highestelectron affinityof any metal, at 222.8 kJ/mol, makingAu−a stable species,[54]analogous to thehalides.
Gold also has a –1 oxidation state in covalent complexes with thegroup 4transition metals, such as in titanium tetraauride and the analogous zirconium and hafnium compounds. These chemicals are expected to form gold-bridgeddimersin a manner similar totitanium(IV) hydride.[55]
Gold(II) compounds are usuallydiamagneticwith Au–Au bonds such as [Au(CH2)2P(C6H5)2]2Cl2. The evaporation of a solution ofAu(OH)3in concentratedH2SO4produces red crystals ofgold(II) sulfate,Au2(SO4)2. Originally thought to be a mixed-valence compound, it has been shown to containAu4+2cations, analogous to the better-knownmercury(I)ion,Hg2+2.[56][57]A gold(II) complex, thetetraxenonogold(II)cation, which containsxenonas a ligand, occurs in[AuXe4](Sb2F11)2.[58]In September 2023, a novel type ofmetal-halide perovskite materialconsisting of Au3+and Au2+cations in its crystal structure has been found.[59]It has been shown to be unexpectedly stable at normal conditions.
Gold pentafluoride, along with its derivative anion,AuF−6, and itsdifluorine complex,gold heptafluoride, is the sole example of gold(V), the highest verified oxidation state.[60]
Some gold compounds exhibitaurophilic bonding, which describes the tendency of gold ions to interact at distances that are too long to be a conventional Au–Au bond but shorter thanvan der Waals bonding. The interaction is estimated to be comparable in strength to that of ahydrogen bond.
Well-defined cluster compounds are numerous.[53]In some cases, gold has a fractional oxidation state. A representative example is the octahedral species{Au(P(C6H5)3)}2+6.

## Gold and platinum production in the universe
Gold andplatinumare produced in the universe through several cosmic processes and were present in thedustfrom which theSolar Systemformed.[61]Scientists have identified three main cosmic sources for the formation of these metals:supernova nucleosynthesis,neutron star collisions,[62]and magnetar flares.
All three sources involve a process called ther-process(rapid neutron capture), which forms elements heavier thaniron.[63]For decades, scientists believedsupernova nucleosynthesiswas the primary mechanism for gold and platinum formation. More recently, research has shown thatneutron star collisionsproduce significant quantities of gold and platinum through the r-process.[64]
In August 2017, the spectroscopic signatures of heavy elements, including gold and platinum, were directly observed by electromagnetic observatories during theGW170817neutron star merger event.[65]This confirmed neutron star mergers as a source for gold and platinum after years of only indirect detection.[66]This single event generated between 3 and 13Earth massesof gold, suggesting that neutron star mergers might produce enough gold to account for most of this element in the universe.[67]
However, neutron star mergers alone cannot explain all cosmic gold and platinum, particularly in older stars, because these mergers occur relatively late in galactic history and are infrequent (approximately once every 100,000 years).[68]This created a timing paradox in explaining the presence of gold and platinum in stars formed early in the universe.[68]
In 2025, researchers resolved this paradox by confirming that giant flares frommagnetars(highly magnetic neutron stars) are also a significant source of gold and platinum formation.[69]Analysis of a 2004 magnetar flare showed these events produce heavy elements through the same r-process as neutron star mergers. The amount of heavy elements created in a single magnetar flare can exceed the mass of Mars.[70]Since magnetars existed earlier in cosmic history and flare more frequently than neutron star mergers occur, they help explain gold and platinum's presence in older stars. Scientists estimate magnetar flares may contribute approximately 1–10% of all elements heavier than iron in our galaxy, including gold and platinum.[71]

## Asteroid origin theories
Because the Earth was moltenwhen it was formed, almost all of the gold and platinum present in theearly Earthprobably sank into theplanetary core. Therefore, as hypothesized in one model, most of the gold in the Earth'scrustandmantleis thought to have been delivered to Earth byasteroid impactsduring theLate Heavy Bombardment, about 4 billion years ago.[72][73]
Gold which is reachable by humans has, in one case, been associated with a particular asteroid impact. The asteroid that formedVredefort impact structure2.020 billion years ago is often credited with seeding theWitwatersrand basininSouth Africawith the richest gold deposits on earth.[74][75][76][77]However, this scenario is now questioned. The gold-bearingWitwatersrandrocks were laid down between 700 and 950 million years before the Vredefort impact.[78][79]These gold-bearing rocks had furthermore been covered by a thick layer of Ventersdorp lavas and theTransvaal Supergroupof rocks before the meteor struck, and thus the gold did not actually arrive in the asteroid/meteorite. What the Vredefort impact achieved, however, was to distort theWitwatersrand basinin such a way that the gold-bearing rocks were brought to the presenterosion surfaceinJohannesburg, on theWitwatersrand, just inside the rim of the original 300 km (190 mi) diameter crater caused by the meteor strike. The discovery of the deposit in 1886 launched theWitwatersrand Gold Rush. Some 22% of all the gold that is ascertained to exist today on Earth has been extracted from these Witwatersrand rocks.[79]

## Mantle return theories
Much of the rest of the gold on Earth is thought to have been incorporated into the planet since its very beginning, asplanetesimalsformed themantle. In 2017, an international group of scientists established that gold "came to the Earth's surface from the deepest regions of our planet",[80]the mantle, as evidenced by their findings atDeseado Massifin theArgentinian Patagonia.[81][clarification needed]

## Occurrence
On Earth, gold is found inoresin rock formed from thePrecambriantime onward.[82]It most often occurs as anative metal, typically in a metalsolid solutionwith silver (i.e. as a gold/silveralloy). Such alloys usually have a silver content of 8–10%.Electrumis elemental gold with more than 20% silver, and is commonly known aswhite gold. Electrum's color runs from golden-silvery to silvery, dependent upon the silver content. The more silver, the lower thespecific gravity.
Native gold occurs as very small to microscopic particles embedded in rock, often together withquartzorsulfide mineralssuch as "fool's gold", which is apyrite.[83]These are calledlodedeposits. The metal in a native state is also found in the form of free flakes, grains or largernuggets[82]that have been eroded from rocks and end up inalluvialdeposits calledplacer deposits. Such free gold is always richer at the exposed surface of gold-bearing veins, owing to theoxidationof accompanying minerals followed by weathering; and by washing of the dust into streams and rivers, where it collects and can be welded by water action to form nuggets.
Gold sometimes occurs combined withtelluriumas themineralscalaverite,krennerite,nagyagite,petziteandsylvanite(seetelluride minerals), and as the rare bismuthide maldonite (Au2Bi) and antimonideaurostibite(AuSb2). Gold also occurs in rare alloys withcopper,lead, andmercury: the mineralsauricupride(Cu3Au), novodneprite (AuPb3) and weishanite ((Au,Ag)3Hg2).
A 2004 research paper suggests that microbes can sometimes play an important role in forming gold deposits, transporting and precipitating gold to form grains and nuggets that collect in alluvial deposits.[84]
A 2013 study has claimed water in faults vaporizes during an earthquake, depositing gold. When an earthquake strikes, it moves along afault. Water often lubricates faults, filling in fractures and jogs. About 10 kilometers (6.2 mi) below the surface, under very high temperatures and pressures, the water carries high concentrations of carbon dioxide, silica, and gold. During an earthquake, the fault jog suddenly opens wider. The water inside the void instantly vaporizes, flashing to steam and forcing silica, which forms the mineral quartz, and gold out of the fluids and onto nearby surfaces.[85]

## Seawater
The world'soceanscontain gold. Measured concentrations of gold in the Atlantic and Northeast Pacific are 50–150femtomol/L or 10–30 parts perquadrillion(about 10–30 g/km3). In general, gold concentrations for south Atlantic and central Pacific samples are the same (~50 femtomol/L) but less certain. Mediterranean deep waters contain slightly higher concentrations of gold (100–150 femtomol/L), which is attributed to wind-blown dust or rivers. At 10 parts per quadrillion, the Earth'soceanswould hold 15,000 tonnes of gold.[86]These figures are three orders of magnitude less than reported in the literature prior to 1988, indicating contamination problems with the earlier data.
A number of people have claimed to be able to economically recover gold fromsea water, but they were either mistaken or acted in an intentional deception.Prescott Jerneganran a gold-from-seawater swindle in theUnited Statesin the 1890s, as did an English fraudster in the early 1900s.[87]Fritz Haberdid research on the extraction of gold from sea water in an effort to help payGermany's reparations followingWorld War I.[88]Based on the published values of 2 to 64 ppb of gold in seawater, a commercially successful extraction seemed possible. After analysis of 4,000 water samples yielding an average of 0.004 ppb, it became clear that extraction would not be possible, and he ended the project.[89]

## History
The earliest recorded metal employed by humans appears to be gold. Small amounts of natural gold have been found in Spanish caves used during the latePaleolithicperiod,c.40,000 BC.[91]
The oldest gold artifacts in the world are fromBulgariaand are dating back to the 5th millennium BC, such as those found in theVarna Necropolisnear Lake Varna and theBlack Seacoast, thought to be the earliest "well-dated" finding of gold artifacts in history.[92][82][93]
Gold artifacts probably made their appearance in Ancient Egypt at the beginning of the pre-dynastic period, at the end of the fifth millennium BC and the start of the fourth, and smelting was developed during the course of the 4th millennium; gold artifacts appear in the archeology of Lower Mesopotamia during the early 4th millennium.[94]As of 1990, gold artifacts found at theWadi Qanacave cemetery of the4th millennium BCinWest Bankwere the earliest from the Levant.[95]Gold artifacts such as thegolden hatsand theNebra diskappeared in Central Europe from the 2nd millennium BCBronze Age.
Exploitation of gold in the south-east corner of theBlack Seais said to date from the time ofMidas, and this gold was important in the establishment of what is probably the world's earliest coinage inLydiaaround 610 BC.[96]
DuringMansa Musa's (ruler of theMali Empirefrom 1312 to 1337)hajjtoMeccain 1324, he passed throughCairoin July 1324, and was reportedly accompanied by acamel trainthat included thousands of people and nearly a hundred camels where he gave away so much gold that it depressed the price in Egypt for over a decade, causing highinflation.[97]
The European exploration of the Americas was fueled in no small part by reports of the gold ornaments displayed in great profusion byNative Americanpeoples, especially inMesoamerica,Peru,EcuadorandColombia. TheAztecsregarded gold as the product of the gods, calling it literally "god excrement" (teocuitlatlinNahuatl), and afterMoctezuma IIwas killed, most of this gold was shipped to Spain.[99]However, for theindigenous peoples of North Americagold was considered useless and they saw much greater value in othermineralswhich were directly related to their utility, such asobsidian,flint, andslate.[100]
Beginning in theearly modern period, EuropeanexplorationandcolonizationofWest Africawas driven in large part by reports of gold deposits in the region, which was eventually referred to by Europeans as the "Gold Coast".[101]From the late 15th to early 19th centuries, European trade in the region was primarily focused in gold, along withivoryandslaves.[102]The gold trade in West Africa was dominated by theAshanti Empire, who initially traded with thePortuguesebefore branching out and trading withBritish,French,SpanishandDanishmerchants.[103]British desires to secure control of West African gold deposits played a role in theAnglo-Ashanti warsof the late 19th century, which saw the Ashanti Empireannexed by Britain.[104]
One main goal of thealchemistswas to produce gold from other substances, such aslead— presumably by the interaction with a mythical substance called thephilosopher's stone. Trying to produce gold led the alchemists to systematically find out what can be done with substances, and this laid the foundation for today'schemistry, which can produce gold (albeit uneconomically) by usingnuclear transmutation.[105]

## Production
According to theUnited States Geological Surveyin 2016, about 5,726,000,000 troy ounces (178,100 t) of gold has been accounted for, of which 85% remains in active use.[106]

## Mining and prospecting
Since the 1880s, South Africa has been the source of a large proportion of the world's gold supply, and about 22% of the gold presently accounted is from South Africa. Production in 1970 accounted for 79% of the world supply, about 1,480 tonnes. In 2007 China (with 276 tonnes) overtook South Africa as the world's largest gold producer, the first time since 1905 that South Africa had not been the largest.[107]
In 2023,Chinawas the world's leading gold-mining country, followed in order by Russia, Australia, Canada, the United States and Ghana.[14]
In South America, the controversial projectPascua Lamaaims at exploitation of rich fields in the high mountains ofAtacama Desert, at the border betweenChileandArgentina.
It has been estimated that up to one-quarter of the yearly global gold production originates from artisanal or small scale mining.[108][109][110]
The city ofJohannesburglocated in South Africa was founded as a result of theWitwatersrand Gold Rushwhich resulted in the discovery of some of the largest natural gold deposits in recorded history. The gold fields are confined to the northern and north-western edges of theWitwatersrand basin, which is a 5–7 km (3.1–4.3 mi) thick layer ofarcheanrocks located, in most places, deep under theFree State,Gautengand surrounding provinces.[111]These Witwatersrand rocks are exposed at the surface on theWitwatersrand, in and around Johannesburg, but also in isolated patches to the south-east and south-west of Johannesburg, as well as in an arc around theVredefort Domewhich lies close to the center of the Witwatersrand basin.[78][111]From these surface exposures the basindipsextensively, requiring some of the mining to occur at depths of nearly 4,000 m (13,000 ft), making them, especially theSavukaandTauTonamines to the south-west of Johannesburg, the deepest mines on Earth. The gold is found only in six areas wherearcheanrivers from the north and north-west formed extensive pebblyBraided riverdeltas before draining into the "Witwatersrand sea" where the rest of the Witwatersrand sediments were deposited.[111]
TheSecond Boer Warof 1899–1901 between theBritish Empireand theAfrikanerBoerswas at least partly over the rights of miners and possession of the gold wealth in South Africa.
During the 19th century,gold rushesoccurred whenever large gold deposits were discovered. The first documented discovery of gold in the United States was at theReed Gold Minenear Georgeville, North Carolina in 1803.[112]The first major gold strike in the United States occurred in a small north Georgia town calledDahlonega.[113]Further gold rushes occurred inCalifornia,Colorado, theBlack Hills,Otagoin New Zealand, a number of locations acrossAustralia,Witwatersrandin South Africa, and theKlondikein Canada.
Grasberg minelocated inPapua,Indonesiais the largestgold minein the world.[114]

## Extraction and refining
Gold extractionis most economical in large, easily mined deposits. Ore grades as little as 0.5 parts per million (ppm) can be economical. Typical ore grades inopen-pitmines are 1–5 ppm; ore grades in underground orhard rockmines are usually at least 3 ppm. Because ore grades of 30 ppm are usually needed before gold is visible to the naked eye, in most gold mines the gold is invisible.
The average gold mining and extraction costs were about $317 per troy ounce in 2007 (equivalent to $492 in 2025), but these can vary widely depending on mining type and ore quality; global mine production amounted to 2,471.1 tonnes.[115]
After initial production, gold is often subsequently refined industrially by theWohlwill processwhich is based onelectrolysisor by theMiller process, that is chlorination in the melt. The Wohlwill process results in higher purity, but is more complex and is only applied in small-scale installations.[116][117]Other methods of assaying and purifying smaller amounts of gold include parting and inquartation as well ascupellation, or refining methods based on the dissolution of gold in aqua regia.[118]

## Recycling
In 1997, recycled gold accounted for approximately 20% of the 2700 tons of gold supplied to the market.[119]Jewelry companies such as Generation Collection and computer companies includingDellconduct recycling.[120]
As of 2020, the amount ofcarbon dioxideCO2produced in mining a kilogram of gold is 16 tonnes, while recycling a kilogram of gold produces 53 kilograms ofCO2equivalent. Approximately 30 percent of the global gold supply is recycled and not mined as of 2020.[121]

## Pollution
Gold production is associated with contribution to hazardouspollution.[124]
Low-grade gold ore may contain less than oneppmgold metal; such ore isgroundand mixed withsodium cyanideto dissolve the gold. Cyanide is a highly poisonous chemical, which can kill living creatures when exposed in minute quantities. Manycyanide spills[125]from gold mines have occurred in both developed and developing countries which killed aquatic life in long stretches of affected rivers. Environmentalists consider these events major environmental disasters.[126][127]Up to thirty tons of used ore can be dumped as waste for producing one troy ounce of gold.[128]Gold ore dumps are the source of many heavy elements such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper,arsenic,seleniumand mercury. When sulfide-bearing minerals in these ore dumps are exposed to air and water, the sulfide transforms intosulfuric acidwhich in turn dissolves these heavy metals facilitating their passage into surface water and ground water. This process is calledacid mine drainage. These gold ore dumps contain long-term, highlyhazardous waste.[128]
It was once common to use mercury to recover gold from ore, but today the use of mercury is largely limited to small-scale individual miners.[129]Minute quantities of mercury compounds can reach water bodies, causing heavy metal contamination. Mercury can then enter into the human food chain in the form ofmethylmercury.Mercury poisoningin humans can cause severe brain damage.[130]
Gold extraction is also a highly energy-intensive industry — extracting ore from deep mines and grinding the large quantity of ore for further chemical extraction requires nearly 25kWhof electricity per gram of gold produced.[131]

## Monetary use
Gold has beenwidely usedthroughout the world asmoney,[132]for efficient indirect exchange (versusbarter), and to store wealth inhoards. For exchange purposes,mintsproduce standardizedgold bullioncoins,barsandother unitsof fixed weight and purity.
The first known coins containing gold were struck in Lydia, Asia Minor, around 600 BC.[96]Thetalentcoin of gold in use during the periods of Grecian history both before and during the time of the life of Homer weighed between 8.42 and 8.75 grams.[133]From an earlier preference in using silver, European economies re-established the minting of gold as coinage during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.[134]
Bills(that mature into gold coin) andgold certificates(convertible into gold coin at the issuing bank) added to the circulating stock ofgold standardmoney in most 19th century industrial economies. In preparation forWorld War Ithe warring nations moved to fractional gold standards, inflating their currencies to finance the war effort. Post-war, the victorious countries, most notably Britain, gradually restored gold-convertibility, but international flows of gold via bills of exchange remained embargoed; international shipments were made exclusively for bilateral trades or to pay war reparations.
AfterWorld War IIgold was replaced by a system of nominallyconvertible currenciesrelated by fixed exchange rates following theBretton Woods system.Gold standardsand the direct convertibility of currencies to gold have been abandoned by world governments, led in 1971 by the United States' refusal to redeem its dollars in gold.Fiat currencynow fills most monetary roles.Switzerlandwas the last country to tie its currency to gold; this was ended by a referendum in 1999.[135]
Central banks continue to keep a portion of their liquid reserves as gold in some form, and metals exchanges such as theLondon Bullion Market Associationstill clear transactions denominated in gold, including future delivery contracts. Today,gold miningoutput is declining.[136]With the sharp growth of economies in the 20th century, and increasing foreign exchange, the world'sgold reservesand their trading market have become a small fraction of all markets and fixed exchange rates of currencies to gold have been replaced by floating prices for gold and goldfuture contract. Though the gold stock grows by only 1% or 2% per year, very little metal is irretrievably consumed. Inventory above ground would satisfy many decades of industrial and even artisan uses at current prices.
The gold proportion (fineness) of alloys is measured bykarat(k). Pure gold (commercially termedfinegold) is designated as 24 karat, abbreviated 24k. English gold coins intended for circulation from 1526 into the 1930s were typically a standard 22k alloy calledcrown gold,[137]for hardness (American gold coins for circulation after 1837 contain an alloy of 0.900 fine gold, or 21.6 kt).[138]
Often the prices of variousplatinumgroup metals can be much higher than gold, although gold has been used as a standard forcurrenciesto a greater degree than the platinum group metals. Gold has been used as a symbol for purity, value, royalty, and particularly roles that combine these properties. Gold as a sign of wealth and prestige was ridiculed byThomas Morein his treatiseUtopia. On that imaginary island, gold is so abundant that it is used to make chains for slaves, tableware, and lavatory seats. When ambassadors from other countries arrive, dressed in ostentatious gold jewels and badges, the Utopians mistake them for menial servants, paying homage instead to the most modestly dressed of their party.
TheISO 4217currency code of gold is XAU.[139]Many holders of gold store it in form ofbullioncoins orbarsas a hedge againstinflationor other economic disruptions. A paper by theNational Bureau of Economic Researchfound that gold may be reliable as an inflation hedge over long timescales (centuries) but not over practical timescales.[140]Modernbullion coinsfor investment or collector purposes do not require good mechanical wear properties; they are typically fine gold at 24k, although theAmerican Gold Eagleand the Britishgold sovereigncontinue to be minted in 22k (0.92) metal in historical tradition, and the South AfricanKrugerrand, first released in 1967, is also 22k (0.92).[141]
Thespecial issueCanadian Gold Maple Leafcoin contains the highest purity gold of anybullion coin, at 99.999% or 0.99999, while thepopular issueCanadian Gold Maple Leaf coin has a purity of 99.99%. In 2006, theUnited States Mintbegan producing theAmerican Buffalogold bullion coin with a purity of 99.99%. TheAustralianGold Kangaroos were first coined in 1986 as theAustralian Gold Nuggetbut changed the reverse design in 1989. Other modern coins include theAustrianVienna Philharmonicbullion coin and theChinese Gold Panda.[142]

## Price
Like other precious metals, gold is measured bytroy weightand by grams. The proportion of gold in the alloy is measured bykarat(k), with 24 karat (24k) being pure gold (100%), and lower karat numbers proportionally less (18k = 75%). The purity of agold baror coin can also be expressed as a decimal figure ranging from 0 to 1, known as themillesimal fineness, such as 0.995 being nearly pure.
The price of gold is determined through trading in the gold andderivativesmarkets, but a procedure known as theGold FixinginLondon, originating in September 1919, provides a daily benchmark price to the industry. The afternoon fixing was introduced in 1968 to provide a price when US markets are open.[143]

## Jewelry
Pure (24k) gold is oftenalloyedwith other metals for use in jewelry, altering its hardness and ductility, melting point, color and other properties. Alloys with lowerkarat rating, typically 22k, 18k, 14k or 10k, contain higher percentages of copper, silver, or other base metals in the alloy.[33]Nickel is toxic, and its release from nickel white gold is controlled by legislation in Europe.[33]Palladium-gold alloys are more expensive than those using nickel.[144]High-karat white gold alloys are more resistant to corrosion than are either pure silver orsterling silver, though not as corrosion-proof asplatinumjewelry. The Japanese craft ofMokume-ganeexploits the color contrasts between laminated colored gold alloys to produce decorative wood-grain effects.
Goldsolderis used for joining the components of gold jewelry by high-temperature hard soldering orbrazing. If the work is to be ofhallmarkingquality, the gold solder alloy must match the fineness of the work, and alloy formulas are manufactured to color-match yellow and white gold. Gold solder is usually made in at least three melting-point ranges referred to as Easy, Medium and Hard. By using the hard, high-melting point solder first, followed by solders with progressively lower melting points, goldsmiths can assemble complex items with several separate soldered joints. Gold can also be made intothreadand used inembroidery.

## Electronics
Only 10% of the world consumption of new gold produced goes to industry,[16]but by far the most important industrial use for new gold is in fabrication of corrosion-freeelectrical connectorsin computers and other electrical devices. For example, according to the World Gold Council, a typical cell phone may contain 50 mg of gold, worth about three dollars. But since nearly one billion cell phones are produced each year, a gold value of US$2.82 (equivalent to $3 in 2025) in each phone adds to US$2.82 billion in gold from just this application (equivalent to $3,102,513,077 in 2025).[145]
Though gold is attacked by free chlorine, its good conductivity and general resistance to oxidation and corrosion in other environments (including resistance to non-chlorinated acids) has led to its widespread industrial use in the electronic era as a thin-layer coating onelectrical connectors, thereby ensuring good connection. For example, gold is used in the connectors of the more expensive electronics cables, such as audio, video andUSBcables. The benefit of using gold over other connector metals such astinin these applications has been debated; gold connectors are often criticized by audio-visual experts as unnecessary for most consumers and seen as simply a marketing ploy. However, the use of gold in other applications in electronic sliding contacts in highly humid or corrosive atmospheres, and in use for contacts with a very high failure cost (certaincomputers, communications equipment,spacecraft,jet aircraftengines) remains very common.[146]
Besides sliding electrical contacts, gold is also used inelectrical contactsbecause of its resistance tocorrosion,electrical conductivity,ductilityand lack oftoxicity.[147]Switch contacts are generally subjected to more intense corrosion stress than are sliding contacts. Fine gold wires are used to connectsemiconductor devicesto their packages through a process known aswire bonding.
The concentration of free electrons in gold metal is 5.91×1022cm−3.[148]Gold is highlyconductiveto electricity and has been used forelectrical wiringin some high-energy applications (only silver and copper are more conductive per volume, but gold is the only of these three with zero corrosion). For example, gold electrical wires were used during some of theManhattan Project's atomic experiments, but large high-current silver wires were used in thecalutronisotope separator magnets in the project.
It is estimated that 16% of the world's presently-accounted-for gold and 22% of the world's silver is contained in electronic technology in Japan.[149]

## Medicine
There are only two gold compounds currently employed as pharmaceuticals in modern medicine (sodium aurothiomalateandauranofin), used in the treatment of arthritis and other similar conditions in the US due to theiranti-inflammatoryproperties. These drugs have been explored as a means to help to reduce the pain and swelling ofrheumatoid arthritis, and also (historically) againsttuberculosisand some parasites.[150][151]
Historically, metallic and gold compounds have long been used for medicinal purposes. Gold, usually as the metal, is perhaps the most anciently administered medicine (apparently by shamanic practitioners)[151]and known toDioscorides.[152][153]In medieval times, gold was often seen as beneficial for the health, in the belief that something so rare and beautiful could not be anything but healthy.
In the 19th century gold had a reputation as ananxiolytic, a therapy for nervous disorders.Depression,epilepsy,migraine, and glandular problems such asamenorrheaandimpotencewere treated, and most notablyalcoholism(Keeley, 1897).[154]
The apparent paradox[further explanation needed]of the actual toxicology of the substance suggests the possibility of serious gaps in the understanding of the action of gold in physiology.[155]Only salts and radioisotopes of gold are of pharmacological value, since elemental (metallic) gold is inert to all chemicals it encounters inside the body (e.g., ingested gold cannot be attacked by stomach acid).
Gold alloys are used inrestorative dentistry, especially in tooth restorations, such ascrownsand permanentbridges. The gold alloys' slight malleability facilitates the creation of a superior molar mating surface with other teeth and produces results that are generally more satisfactory than those produced by the creation of porcelain crowns. The use of gold crowns in more prominent teeth such as incisors is favored in some cultures and discouraged in others.
Colloidal goldpreparations (suspensions ofgold nanoparticles) in water are intensely red-colored, and can be made with tightly controlled particle sizes up to a few tens of nanometers across by reduction of gold chloride withcitrateorascorbateions. Colloidal gold is used in research applications in medicine, biology andmaterials science. The technique ofimmunogold labelingexploits the ability of the gold particles to adsorb protein molecules onto their surfaces. Colloidal gold particles coated with specific antibodies can be used as probes for the presence and position of antigens on the surfaces of cells.[156]In ultrathin sections of tissues viewed byelectron microscopy, the immunogold labels appear as extremely dense round spots at the position of theantigen.[157]
Gold, or alloys of gold andpalladium, are applied as conductive coating to biological specimens and other non-conducting materials such as plastics and glass to be viewed in ascanning electron microscope. The coating, which is usually applied bysputteringwith anargonplasma, has a triple role in this application. Gold's very high electrical conductivity drainselectrical chargeto earth, and its very high density provides stopping power for electrons in theelectron beam, helping to limit the depth to which the electron beam penetrates the specimen. This improves definition of the position and topography of the specimen surface and increases thespatial resolutionof the image. Gold also produces a high output ofsecondary electronswhen irradiated by an electron beam, and these low-energy electrons are the most commonly used signal source used in the scanning electron microscope.[158]
The isotopegold-198(half-life2.7 days) is used innuclear medicine, in somecancertreatments and for treating other diseases.[159][160]

## Toxicity
Pure metallic (elemental) gold is non-toxic and non-irritating when ingested[173]and is sometimes used as a food decoration in the form ofgold leaf.[174]Metallic gold is also a component of the alcoholic drinksGoldschläger,Gold Strike, andGoldwasser. Metallic gold is approved as afood additivein the EU (E175in theCodex Alimentarius). Although the gold ion is toxic, the acceptance of metallic gold as a food additive is due to its relative chemical inertness, and resistance to being corroded or transformed into soluble salts (gold compounds) by any known chemical process which would be encountered in the human body.
Soluble compounds (gold salts) such asgold chlorideare toxic to the liver and kidneys. Commoncyanidesalts of gold such as potassium gold cyanide, used in goldelectroplating, are toxic by virtue of both their cyanide and gold content. There are rare cases of lethal gold poisoning frompotassium gold cyanide.[175][176]Gold toxicity can be ameliorated withchelation therapywith an agent such asdimercaprol.
Gold metal was votedAllergen of the Yearin 2001 by the American Contact Dermatitis Society; gold contact allergies affect mostly women.[177]Despite this, gold is a relatively non-potent contact allergen, in comparison with metals likenickel.[178]
A sample of the fungusAspergillus nigerwas found growing from gold mining solution; and was found to contain cyano metal complexes, such as gold, silver, copper, iron and zinc. The fungus also plays a role in the solubilization of heavy metal sulfides.[179]