## Gross domestic product
Gross domestic product(GDP) is amonetarymeasureof the totalmarket value[1]of all of thefinal goodsand services which are produced and rendered during a specific period of time (usually a year) by acountry[2]or countries.[3][4]GDP is often used to measure the economic activity of a country or region.[2]The major components of GDP are consumption, government spending, net exports (exports minus imports), and investment. Changing any of these factors can increase the size of the economy. For example, population growth through mass immigration can raise consumption and demand for public services, thereby contributing to GDP growth. However, GDP is not a measure of overallstandard of livingor well-being, as it does not account for how income is distributed among the population. A country may rank high in GDP but still experiencejobless growthdepending on its planned economic structure and strategies. Dividing total GDP by the population gives an idealized rough measure ofGDP per capita.[5][3]Several national and international economic organizations, such as theOECDand theInternational Monetary Fund, maintain their own definitions of GDP.[6][7]
GDP is often used as a metric forinternational comparisonsas well as abroad measure of economic progress. It serves as a statistical indicator of national development and progress. Total GDP can also be broken down into the contribution of each industry or sector of the economy.[8]Nominal GDP is useful when comparing national economies on the international market using currentexchange rate.[9]To compare economies over time,inflationcan be adjusted by comparingreal instead of nominal values. For cross-country comparisons, GDP figures are often adjusted for differences in thecost of livingusingpurchasing power parity(PPP).GDP per capita at purchasing power paritycan be useful for comparingliving standardsbetween nations.
GDP has been criticized for leaving out keyexternalities, such asresource extraction,[clarification needed]environmental impactandunpaid domestic work.[10]Alternative economic indicators such asdoughnut economicsuse other measures, such as theHuman Development IndexorBetter Life Index, as better approaches to measuring the effect of the economy onhuman developmentandwell-being.

## History
SirWilliam Pettycame up with a concept of GDP, to calculate thetax burden, and argue landlords were unfairly taxed duringwarfare between the Dutch and the Englishbetween 1652 and 1674.[11]Charles Davenantdeveloped the method further in 1695.[12]
The modern concept of GDP was first developed bySimon Kuznetsfor a 1934U.S. Congressreport, where he warned against its use as a measure of welfare (see below underlimitations and criticisms).[13]After theBretton Woods Conferencein 1944, GDP became the main tool for measuring a country's economy.[14]At that timegross national product(GNP) was the preferred estimate, which differed from GDP in that it measured production by a country's citizens at home and abroad rather than its "resident institutional units" (seeOECDdefinition above). The switch from GNP to GDP in the United States occurred in 1991. The role that measurements of GDP played in World War II was crucial to the subsequent political acceptance of GDP values as indicators of national development and progress.[15]A crucial role was played here by theU.S. Department of CommerceunderMilton Gilbertwhere ideas from Kuznets were embedded intoinstitutions.
The history of the concept of GDP should be distinguished from the history of changes in many ways of estimating it. The value added by firms is relatively easy to calculate from their accounts, but the value added by thepublic sector, by financial industries, and byintangible assetcreation is more complex. These activities are increasingly important in developed economies, and the international conventions governing their estimation and their inclusion or exclusion in GDP regularly change in an attempt to keep up with industrial advances. In the words of one academic economist, "The actual number for GDP is, therefore, the product of a vast patchwork of statistics and a complicated set of processes carried out on the raw data to fit them to the conceptual framework."[16]
Chinaofficially adopted GDP in 1993 as its indicator of economic performance. Previously, China had relied on a Marxist-inspired national accounting system.[17]

## Determining gross domestic product (GDP)
GDP can be determined in three ways, all of which should, theoretically, give the same result. They are the production (or output or value added) approach, the income approach, and the speculated expenditure approach. It is representative of the total output and income within an economy.
The most direct of the three is the production approach, which sums the outputs of every class of enterprise to arrive at the total. The expenditure approach works on the principle that all of the products must be bought by somebody, therefore the value of the total product must be equal to people's total expenditures in buying things. The income approach works on the principle that the incomes of the productive factors ("producers", colloquially) must be equal to the value of their product, and determines GDP by finding the sum of all producers' incomes.[18]

## Production approach
Also known as the Value Added Approach, it calculates how much value is contributed at each stage of production.
This approach mirrors theOECD(Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) definition given above.
Gross value added= gross value of output – value of intermediate consumption.
Value of output = value of the total sales of goods and services plus the value of changes in the inventory.
The sum of the gross value added in the various economic activities is known as "GDP at factor cost".
GDP at factor cost plus indirect taxes less subsidies on products = "GDP at producer price".
For measuring the output of domestic product, economic activities (i.e. industries) are classified into various sectors. After classifying economic activities, the output of each sector is calculated by any of the following two methods:
The value of output of all sectors is then added to get the gross value of output at factor cost. Subtracting each sector's intermediate consumption from gross output value gives the GVA (=GDP) at factor cost. Adding indirect tax minus subsidies to GVA (GDP) at factor cost gives the "GVA (GDP) at producer prices".

## Income approach
The second way of estimating GDP is to use "the sum of primary incomes distributed by resident producer units".[6]
If GDP is calculated this way it is sometimes called gross domestic income (GDI), or GDP (I). GDI should provide the same amount as the expenditure method described later. By definition, GDI is equal to GDP. In practice, however, measurement errors will make the two figures slightly off when reported by national statistical agencies.
This method measures GDP by adding incomes that firms pay households for factors of production they hire – wages for labour, interest for capital, rent for land and profits for entrepreneurship.
The US "National Income and Product Accounts" divide incomes into five categories:
These five income components sum to net domestic income at factor cost.
Two adjustments must be made to get GDP:
Total income can be subdivided according to various schemes, leading to various formulae for GDP measured by the income approach. A common one is:[citation needed]
The sum ofCOE,GOSandGMIis called total factor income; it is the income of all of the factors of production in society. It measures the value of GDP at factor (basic) prices. The difference between basic prices and final prices (those used in the expenditure calculation) is the total taxes and subsidies that the government has levied or paid on that production. So adding taxes less subsidies on production and imports converts GDP(I) atfactor costto GDP(I) at final prices.
Total factor income is also sometimes expressed as:

## Expenditure approach
The third way to estimate GDP is to calculate the sum of the final uses of goods and services (all uses except intermediate consumption) measured in purchasers' prices.[6]
Market goods that are produced are purchased by someone. In the case where a good is produced and unsold, the standard accounting convention is that the producer has bought the good from themselves. Therefore, measuring the total expenditure used to buy things is a way of measuring production. This is known as the expenditure method of calculating GDP.

## Components of GDP by expenditure
GDP (Y)is the sum ofconsumption (C),investment (I),government expenditures (G)andnet exports (X − M).
Here is a description of each GDP component:
C,I, andGare expenditures onfinal goodsand services; expenditures on intermediate goods and services do not count. (Intermediate goods and services are those used by businesses to produce other goods and services within the accounting year.[20]) So for example if acar manufacturerbuysauto parts, assembles the car and sells it, only the final car sold is counted towards the GDP. Meanwhile, if a person buys replacement auto parts to install them on their car, those are counted towards the GDP.
According to the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, which is responsible for calculating the national accounts in the United States, "In general, the source data for the expenditures components are considered more reliable than those for the income components [see income method, above]."[21]
Encyclopedia Britannica records an alternate way of measuring exports minus imports: notating it as the single variable NX.[1][22]

## Nominal GDP and real GDP
The raw GDP figure given by the equations above is called the nominal, historical, or current GDP. When comparing GDP figures from one year to another, compensating for changes in the value of money—for the effects of inflation or deflation—is desirable. To make it more meaningful for year-to-year comparisons, a nominal GDP may be multiplied by the ratio between the value of money in the year the GDP was measured and the value of money in a base year.
For example, suppose a country's GDP in 1990 was$100 millionand its GDP in 2000 was$300 million. Suppose also that inflation had halved the value of its currency over that period. To meaningfully compare its GDP in 2000 to its GDP in 1990, we could multiply the GDP in 2000 by one-half, to make it relative to 1990 as a base year. The result would be that the GDP in 2000 equals$300 million×1⁄2=$150 million,in 1990 monetary terms.We would see that the country's GDP had realistically increased 50percentover that period, not 200 percent, as it might appear from the raw GDP data. The GDP adjusted for changes in money value in this way is called thereal GDP.
The factor used to convert GDP from current to constant values in this way is called theGDP deflator. Unlikeconsumer price index, which measures inflation or deflation in the price of household consumer goods, the GDP deflator measures changes in the prices of all domestically produced goods and services in an economy including investment goods and government services, as well as household consumption goods.[23]

## National measurement
Within each country GDP is normally measured by a national government statistical agency, asprivate sectororganizations normally do not have access to the information required (especially information on expenditure and production by governments).

## International standards
The international standard for measuring GDP is contained in the bookSystem of National Accounts(2008), which was prepared by representatives of theInternational Monetary Fund,European Union,Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,United NationsandWorld Bank. The publication is normally referred to as SNA2008 to distinguish it from the previous edition published in 1993 (SNA93) or 1968 (called SNA68)[24]
SNA2008 provides a set of rules and procedures for the measurement of national accounts. The standards are designed to be flexible, to allow for differences in local statistical needs and conditions.

## Problems with GDP data
A peer-reviewed study published in theJournal of Political Economyin October 2022 found signs of manipulation ofeconomic growthstatistics in the majority of countries.[25][26]This manipulation was greatest in countries that were semi-authoritarian/authoritarian, or did not have effectiveseparation of powers. The study took the annual growth in the brightness of lights at night, as measured by satellites, and compared it to officially reported economic growth. Authoritarian states consistently reported higher growth in GDP than the growth in night lights would suggest, an effect that could not be explained by economic structures, sector composition or other factors.[25]
Corporate havenscan also have adistorted GDP.

## Economic growth
Real GDP can be used to calculate the GDP growth rate, which indicates how much a country's production has increased (or decreased, if the growth rate is negative) compared to the previous year, typically expressed aspercentage change. The economic growth can be expressed as:

## Relation to gross national income
GDP can be contrasted with thegross national income(GNI) also known as gross national product (GNP). The difference is that GDP defines its scope according to location, while GNI defines its scope according to ownership. In a global context,world GDP and world GNIare, therefore, equivalent terms.
GDP is a product produced within a country's borders; GNI is product produced by enterprises owned by a country's citizens. The two would be the same if all of the productive enterprises in a country were owned by its own citizens and those citizens did not own productive enterprises in any other countries. In practice, however, foreign ownership makes GDP and GNI non-identical. Production within a country's borders, but by an enterprise owned by somebody outside the country, counts as part of its GDP but not its GNI; on the other hand, production by an enterprise located outside the country, but owned by one of its citizens, counts as part of its GNI but not its GDP.
For example, the GNI of theUSis the value of output produced by American-owned firms, regardless of where the firms are located.
Gross national income (GNI) equals GDP plus income receipts from the rest of the world minus income payments to the rest of the world.[28]
In 1991, theUnited Statesswitched from using GNP to using GDP as its primary measure of production.[29]The relationship between United States GDP and GNP is shown in table 1.7.5 of theNational Income and Product Accounts.[30]
Other examples that amplify differences between GDP and GNI can be found by comparing indicators of developed and developing countries. The GDP of Japan for 2020 was 5.05559 trillion.[31]Predictably, as a developed country, Japan has a higher GNI of 5.16915 trillion for the same year,[32]an increase of 113.560 million. This is indicative of the production level in the country being higher than that of national production. On the other hand, the case withArmeniais the opposite with its GNI in 2023 being lower than its GDP by 3.85 billion. This shows countries that receive investments and foreign aid from abroad.[33][34]

## Limitations and criticisms
GDP does not include several factors that influence the standard of living. In particular, it fails to account for:
Simon Kuznets, the economist who developed the first comprehensive set of measures of national income, stated in his second report to the U.S. Congress in 1937, in a section titled "Uses and Abuses of National Income Measurements":[13]
The valuable capacity of the human mind to simplify a complex situation in a compact characterization becomes dangerous when not controlled in terms of definitely stated criteria. With quantitative measurements especially, the definiteness of the result suggests, often misleadingly, a precision and simplicity in the outlines of the object measured. Measurements of national income are subject to this type of illusion and resulting abuse, especially since they deal with matters that are the center of conflict of opposing social groups where the effectiveness of an argument is often contingent upon oversimplification. [...]
All these qualifications upon estimates of national income as an index of productivity are just as important when income measurements are interpreted from the point of view of economic welfare. But in the latter case additional difficulties will be suggested to anyone who wants to penetrate below the surface of total figures and market values. Economic welfare cannot be adequately measured unless the personal distribution of income is known. And no income measurement undertakes to estimate the reverse side of income, that is, the intensity and unpleasantness of effort going into the earning of income. The welfare of a nation can, therefore, scarcely be inferred from a measurement of national income as defined above.
In 1962, Kuznets stated:[39]
Distinctions must be kept in mind between quantity and quality of growth, between costs and returns, and between the short and long run. Goals for more growth should specify more growth of what and for what.
GDP as initially defined includes spending on goods and services that would shrink if underlying problems were solved or reduced - for example, medical care, crime-fighting, and the military. During World War II, Kuznets came to argue that military spending should be excluded during peacetime. This idea did not become popular; these activities are tracked because they fit into macroeconomic models (e.g. military spending uses up capital and labor).[40]
Ever since the development of GDP, multiple observers have pointed out limitations of using GDP as the overarching measure of economic and social progress. Furthermore, the GDP does not consider human health nor the educational aspect of a population.[41]
Instances of GDP measures have been considered numbers that are artificial constructs.[42]American politicianRobert F. Kennedy[43]criticized GDP (or GNI), listing many examples of bad things it does count and good things it does not count:
Gross National Product counts air pollution and cigarette advertising, and ambulances to clear our highways of carnage.  It counts special locks for our doors and the jails for the people who break them.  It counts the destruction of the redwood and the loss of our natural wonder in chaotic sprawl.  It counts napalm and counts nuclear warheads and armored cars for the police to fight the riots in our cities.  It counts Whitman's rifle and Speck's knife, and the television programs which glorify violence in order to sell toys to our children.  Yet the gross national product does not allow for the health of our children, the quality of their education or the joy of their play.  It does not include the beauty of our poetry or the strength of our marriages, the intelligence of our public debate or the integrity of our public officials.  It measures neither our wit nor our courage, neither our wisdom nor our learning, neither our compassion nor our devotion to our country, it measures everything in short, except that which makes life worthwhile.  And it can tell us everything about America except why we are proud that we are Americans.[44]

## Deficit spending
Deficit spendingincreases GDP in case of positivefiscal multipliers.[45]GDP as a metric can incentivize politicians tooverspend.[46]Counterfactual GDP under abalanced budgetscenario can be estimated.[47]
If a country becomes increasingly in debt, and spends large amounts of income on debtinterest expense, will be reflected in a decreased GNI[citation needed]but not a decreased GDP. Similarly, if a country sells off its resources to entities outside their country this will also be reflected over time in decreased GNI, but not decreased GDP. This would make the use of GDP more attractive for politicians in countries with increasing national debt and decreasing assets.

## Unpaid work
GDP excludes the value of household and otherunpaid work. Some, includingMartha Nussbaum, argue that this value should be included in measuring GDP, as household labor is largely asubstitutefor goods and services that would otherwise be purchased with money.[48]Even under conservative estimates, the value of unpaid labor in Australia has been calculated to be over 50% of the country's GDP.[49]A later study analyzed this value in other countries, with results ranging from a low of about 15% in Canada (using conservative estimates) to high of nearly 70% in the United Kingdom (using more liberal estimates). For theUnited States, the value was estimated to be between about 20% on the low end to nearly 50% on the high end, depending on the methodology being used.[50]Because many public policies are shaped by GDP calculations and by the related field ofnational accounts,[51]public policy might differ if unpaid work were included in total GDP. Some economists have advocated for changes in the way public policies are formed and implemented.[52]
Some have pointed out that GDP did not adapt to sociotechnical changes to give a more accurate picture of the modern economy and does not encapsulate thevalueof new activities such as delivering price-free information and entertainment onsocial media.[53][54]In 2017Diane Coyleexplained that GDP excludes much unpaid work, writing that "many people contribute free digitalworksuch as writingopen-source softwarethat can substitute for marketed equivalents, and it clearly has great economic value despite a price of zero", which constitutes a common criticism "of the reliance on GDP as the measure of economic success" especially after the emergence of thedigital economy.[55]A 2025 study in theAmerican Economic Journaldevised a new GDP measurement (GDP-B) that accounts for the welfare value of new goods and free goods.[54]
In 2019, Erik Brynjolfsson and Avinash Collis argued that GDP does not reflect the growing value of many digital goods because they have zero price.[56]Along with several coauthors, they proposed an alternative approach,GDP-B, which is based on measuring thebenefitsof goods and services, rather than their price or cost.[57]

## Health
In 2013 scientists reported that largeimprovementsinhealthonly lead to modest long-term increases in GDP per capita.[58]After developing an abstract metric similar to GDP, theCenter for Partnership Studieshighlighted that GDP "and other metrics that reflect and perpetuate them" may not be useful for facilitating the production of products and provision of services that are useful – or comparatively more useful – to society, and instead may "actually encourage, rather than discourage, destructive activities".[59][60]The number ofobeseadults was approximately 600 million (12%) in 2015.[61][non sequitur]

## Environment
Manyenvironmentalistsargue that GDP is a poor measure of social progress because it does not take into account harm to theenvironment.[62][63]
In the language of economics, everything comes down to its monetary value.[64]In essence, GDP rewards behaviors that are detrimental to the environment.[64]GDP also does not capture certain phenomena impacting citizens' well-being.[65]For example, traffic jams could cause GDP to increase as there is a higher consumption of gasoline, however, GDP fails to consider citizens' well-being in terms of the quality of air due to air pollution from the traffic jams.[66]Various alternatives have been developed(see below).
A 2020 study found that "poor regions' GDP grows faster by attracting more pollutingproductionafter connection to China's expressway system.[67]GDP may not be a tool capable of recognizing how muchnatural capitalagents of the economy are building or protecting.[68]In 2020 scientists, as part of aWorld Scientists' Warning to Humanity-associated series, warned that worldwide growth inaffluencein terms of GDP-metrics has increasedresource useandpollutant emissionswith affluentcitizens of the world– in terms of e.g. resource-intensive consumption – being responsible for most negative environmental impacts and central to a transition to safer,sustainableconditions. They summarised evidence, presented solution approaches and stated that far-reachinglifestylechangesneed tocomplement technological advancementsand that existing societies, economies and culturesinciteconsumption expansionand that thestructural imperativeforgrowthincompetitivemarket economiesinhibitssocietal change.[69][70][71]Sarah Arnold, Senior Economist at theNew Economics Foundation(NEF) stated that "GDP includes activities that are detrimental to oureconomyandsocietyin the long term, such asdeforestation, strip mining, overfishing and so on".[72]The number of trees that are net lost annually is estimated to be approximately 10 billion.[73][74]The global average annual deforested land in the 2015–2020 demi-decade was 10 million hectares and the average annual net forest area loss in the 2000–2010 decade 4.7 million hectares, according to theGlobal Forest Resources Assessment 2020.[75]According to one study, depending on the level ofwealth inequality, higher GDP-growth can be associated with more deforestation.[76]In 2019 "agriculture andagribusiness" accounted for 24% of the GDP of Brazil,where a large share of annual net tropical forest loss occurred and is associated with sizable portions of this economic activity domain.[77]
Steve Cohenof the Earth Institute elucidated that while GDP does not distinguish between different activities (orlifestyles), "all consumption behaviors are not created equal and do not have the same impact onenvironmental sustainability".[78]Johan Rockström, director of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, noted that "it's difficult to see if the current G.D.P.-basedmodelof economic growth can go hand-in-hand with rapidcutting of emissions", which nations have agreed to attempt under theParis Agreementin order to mitigate real-world impacts of climate change.[79]
In 1989,John B. CobbandHerman DalyintroducedIndex of Sustainable Economic Welfare(ISEW) by taking into account other factors such as consumption of nonrenewable resources and degradation of the environment. ISEW is roughly defined as: personal consumption + public non-defensive expenditures − private defensive expenditures + capital formation + services from domestic labour − costs ofenvironmental degradation− depreciation of natural capital.
In 2005,Med Jones, an American Economist, at the International Institute of Management, introduced the first secular Gross National Happiness Index a.k.a.Gross National Well-beingframework and Index to complement GDP economics with additional seven dimensions, including environment, education, and government, work, social and health (mental and physical) indicators. The proposal was inspired by the King of Bhutan'sGNHphilosophy.[80][81][82]In 2019, Serge Pierre Besanger published a "GDP 3.0" proposal which combines an expanded GNI formula which he calls GNIX, with aPalma ratioand a set of environmental metrics based on the Daly Rule.[83]
The UK'sNatural Capital Committeehighlighted the shortcomings of GDP in its advice to theUKGovernment in 2013, pointing out that GDP "focuses on flows, not stocks. As a result, an economy can run down its assets yet, at the same time, record high levels of GDP growth, until a point is reached where the depleted assets act as a check on future growth". They then went on to say that "it is apparent that the recorded GDP growth rate overstates thesustainable growthrate. Broader measures of wellbeing and wealth are needed for this and there is a danger that short-term decisions based solely on what is currently measured by national accounts may prove to be costly in the long-term".[citation needed]
China launched theGross Ecosystem Product (GEP)in 2020. It measures the contribution of ecosystems to the economy, including by regulating climate. It spread widely across the country. The first province to issue local rules about GEP wasZhejiang, and a year later it has already decided the fate of a project in theDeqingregion. For example, the GEP of Chengtian Radon Spring Nature Reserve has been calculated as US$43 million.[84]

## GDP per capita
GDP changes withpopulation change. GDP adjusted for population is calledPer-capita GDPorGDP per person. This measures the average production of a person in the country. The major advantage of GDP per capita as an indicator of the standard of living is that it is measured frequently, widely, and consistently. It is measured frequently in that most countries provide information on GDP every quarter, allowing trends to be seen quickly. It is measured widely in that some measure of GDP is available for almost every country in the world, allowing inter-country comparisons. It is measured consistently in that the technical definition of GDP is relatively consistent among countries.
It can be argued that GDP per capita is an indicator of standard of living.[85][86]As a result, GDP per capita as a standard of living is a continued usage because most people have a fairly accurate idea of what it is and know it is tough to come up with quantitative measures for such constructs as happiness, quality of life, and well-being.[85]From the perspective of environmental, social and governance (ESG) measures, GDP per capita trends can be influenced by factors such as gender parity and elements of regulatory quality. The change in number of MSMEs (Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises) in the Philippines from 2008 through 2021 would be an example of elements such as the per capita gross domestic product and unemployment rate having significant effect on a developing country with mixed economy.[87]

## Income distribution
GDP does not account forincome distribution. This can lead to misleading characterizations of economic well-being if the income distribution is heavily skewed toward the high end, as the poorer residents will not directly benefit from the overall level of wealth and income generated in their country (their income might decline, even as the meanGDP per capitarises). GDP per capita measures (like aggregate GDP measures) do not account for income distribution (and tend to overstate the average income per capita). For example, South Africa during apartheid ranked high in terms of GDP per capita, but the benefits of this immense wealth and income were not shared equally among its citizens.[88]The United Nations has aimed in itsSustainable Development Goals, amongst other global initiatives, to address wealth inequality.[89]Seeincome inequality metricsfor discussion of a variety of inequality-based economic measures.[36]A representative measure of the living standard is themedian incomesince it represents themedian voter.[90]The median income growth was found diverging from the GDP per capita growth in some countries.[91]

## Standard of living
Although a high or rising level of GDP per capita is often associated with increased economic and social progress, the opposite sometimes occurs. For example,Jean DrèzeandAmartya Senhave pointed out that an increase in GDP or in GDP growth does not necessarily lead to a higher standard of living, particularly in areas such as healthcare and education.[92]Another important area that does not necessarily improve along with GDP is political liberty, which is most notable in China, where GDP growth is strong yet political liberties are heavily restricted.[93]GDP does not account for the distribution of income among the residents of a country, because GDP is merely an aggregate measure. An economy may be highly developed or growing rapidly, but also contain a wide gap between the rich and the poor in a society. These inequalities often occur on the lines of race, ethnicity, gender, religion, or other minority status within countries.[94]

## Capabilities
In the 1980s,Amartya SenandMartha Nussbaumdeveloped thecapability approach, which focuses on the functional capabilities enjoyed by people within a country, rather than the aggregate GDP within a country. These capabilities consist of the functions that a person is able to achieve.[95]In 1990,Mahbub ul Haq, a Pakistani economist at the United Nations, introduced theHuman Development Index(HDI). The HDI is a composite index of life expectancy at birth, adult literacy rate and standard of living measured as a logarithmic function of GDP, adjusted to purchasing power parity.
In 2009 ProfessorsJoseph Stiglitz,Amartya Sen, andJean-Paul Fitoussiat theCommission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress(CMEPSP), formed by French President,Nicolas Sarkozypublished a proposal to overcome the limitation of GDP economics to expand the focus to well-being economics with a well-being framework consisting of health, environment, work, physical safety, economic safety, and political freedom. This has been adopted in a number of countries as awellbeing economypolicy.
In 2008, theCentre for Bhutan Studiesbegan publishing theBhutan Gross National Happiness (GNH) Index, whose contributors to happiness include physical, mental, and spiritual health; time balance; social and community vitality; cultural vitality; education; living standards; good governance; and ecological vitality.[96]In 2013, theOECD Better Life Indexwas published by the OECD. The dimensions of the index included health, economic, workplace, income, jobs, housing, civic engagement, andlife satisfaction.
Since 2012, John Helliwell,Richard LayardandJeffrey Sachshave edited an annualWorld Happiness Reportwhich reports a national measure of subjective well-being, derived from a single survey question on satisfaction with life. GDP explains some of the cross-national variation in life satisfaction, but more of it is explained by other, social variables.

## Sustainability of growth
In the second decade of the 21st century theUnited Nationsgave the task of creating a measurement of progress that takes "human wellbeing, sustainability and equity" into account to a group co-chaired byKaushik BasuandNora Lustig. In 2025 it published a report which argued that recent global shocks make the need for transformation more urgent. In January 2026, the UN held a conference named "Beyond GDP" attended by major economists. In February 2026,Antonio Guterressaid: "We must place true value on the environment and go beyond gross domestic product as a measure of human progress and wellbeing." The initiative followed a debate aboutsustainableeconomic structures betweengreen growthadvocates, greenKeynesiansand advocates ofdoughnut economy,Wellbeing economy,steady-state economics,degrowth, and according to a recent survey, 73% of around 800 climate policy researchers support post-growth. According toJason Hickelthis initiative will not be enough, because: "A deeper system change is required. Specifically, we need to democratise control over production, which can enable us to change what we produce and for whom. "The dominance of GDP is not an accident, it occurs because GDP measures what is valuable to capital. It is the structure of capitalism that ultimately must be overcome."[97]

## External links
Global
Data
Articles and books