## Hubble Space Telescope
TheHubble Space Telescope(HSTorHubble) is aspace telescopethat was launched intolow Earth orbitin 1990 and remains in operation. It was not thefirst space telescope, but it is one of the largest and most versatile, renowned as a vital research tool and as a public relations boon forastronomy. The Hubble Space Telescope is named after astronomerEdwin Hubbleand is one ofNASA'sGreat Observatories. TheSpace Telescope Science Institute(STScI) selects Hubble's targets and processes the resulting data, while theGoddard Space Flight Center(GSFC) controls the spacecraft.[8]
Hubble features a 2.4 m (7 ft 10 in) mirror, and its five main instruments observe in theultraviolet,visible, andnear-infraredregions of theelectromagnetic spectrum. Hubble's orbit outside the distortion ofEarth's atmosphereallows it to capture extremely high-resolution images with substantially lower background light than ground-based telescopes. It has recorded some of the most detailed visible light images, allowing a deep view into space. Many Hubble observations have led to breakthroughs inastrophysics, such asdetermining the rate of expansion of the universe.
The Hubble Space Telescope was funded and built in the 1970s by NASA with contributions from theEuropean Space Agency. Its intended launch was in 1983, but the project was beset by technical delays, budget problems, and the 1986Challengerdisaster. Hubble was launched onSTS-31in 1990, but its main mirror had been ground incorrectly, resulting inspherical aberrationthat compromised the telescope's capabilities. The optics were corrected to their intended quality by a servicing mission,STS-61, in 1993.
Hubble is the only telescope designed to be maintained in space by astronauts. Five Space Shuttle missions repaired, upgraded, and replaced systems on the telescope, including all five of the main instruments. Thefifth missionwas initially canceled on safety grounds following theColumbiadisaster(2003), but afterNASA administratorMichael D. Griffinapproved it, the servicing mission was completed in 2009. Hubble completed 30 years of operation in April 2020[1]and is predicted to last until 2030 to 2040.[4]
Hubble is the visible light telescope in NASA'sGreat Observatories program; other parts of the spectrum are covered by theCompton Gamma Ray Observatory, theChandra X-ray Observatory, and theSpitzer Space Telescope(which covers the infrared bands).[9]The mid-IR-to-visible band successor to the Hubble telescope is theJames Webb Space Telescope(JWST), which was launched on December 25, 2021, with theNancy Grace Roman Space Telescopedue to follow in 2027.[10][11][12]

## Proposals and precursors
In 1923Hermann Oberth, considered a father of modern rocketry along withRobert H. GoddardandKonstantin Tsiolkovsky, publishedDie Rakete zu den Planetenräumen("The Rocket into Planetary Space"), which mentioned how a telescope could be propelled intoEarthorbit by a rocket.[13]
The history of the Hubble Space Telescope can be traced to 1946, toastronomerLyman Spitzer's paper "Astronomical advantages of an extraterrestrial observatory".[14]In it, he discussed the two main advantages that a space-based observatory would have over ground-based telescopes. First, theangular resolution(the smallest separation at which objects can be clearly distinguished) would be limited only bydiffraction, rather than by the turbulence in the atmosphere, which causes stars to twinkle, known to astronomers asseeing. At that time ground-based telescopes were limited to resolutions of 0.5–1.0arcseconds, compared to a theoretical diffraction-limited resolution of about 0.05 arcsec for an optical telescope with amirror2.5 m (8 ft 2 in) in diameter. Second, a space-based telescope could observeinfraredand ultraviolet light, which are strongly absorbed by theatmosphere of Earth.[14]
Spitzer devoted much of his career to pushing for the development of a space telescope.[15]In 1962, a report by the U.S.National Academy of Sciencesrecommended development of aspace telescopeas part of thespace program, and in 1965, Spitzer was appointed as head of a committee given the task of defining scientific objectives for a large space telescope.[16]
Also crucial was the work ofNancy Grace Roman, the "Mother of Hubble".[17]Well before it became an officialNASAproject, she gave public lectures touting the scientific value of the telescope. After it was approved, she became the program scientist, setting up the steering committee in charge of making astronomer needs feasible to implement[18]and writing testimony toCongressthroughout the 1970s to advocate continued funding of the telescope.[19]Her work as project scientist helped set the standards for NASA's operation of large scientific projects.[20]
Space-based astronomy had begun on a very small scale followingWorld War II, as scientists made use of developments that had taken place inrockettechnology. The first ultravioletspectrumof theSunwas obtained in 1946,[21]and NASA launched theOrbiting Solar Observatory(OSO) to obtain UV, X-ray, and gamma-ray spectra in 1962.[22]Anorbiting solar telescopewas launched in 1962 by the United Kingdom as part of theAriel programme, and in 1966 NASA launched the firstOrbiting Astronomical Observatory(OAO) mission. OAO-1's battery failed after three days, terminating the mission. It was followed byOrbiting Astronomical Observatory 2(OAO-2), which carried out ultraviolet observations ofstarsandgalaxiesfrom its launch in 1968 until 1972, well beyond its original planned lifetime of one year.[23]
The OSO and OAO missions demonstrated the important role space-based observations could play in astronomy. In 1968, NASA developed firm plans for a space-basedreflecting telescopewith a mirror 3 m (9.8 ft) in diameter, known provisionally as the Large Orbiting Telescope or Large Space Telescope (LST), with a launch slated for 1979. These plans emphasized the need for crewed maintenance missions to the telescope to ensure such a costly program had a lengthy working life, and the concurrent development of plans for the reusableSpace Shuttleindicated that the technology to allow this was soon to become available.[24]

## Quest for funding
The continuing success of the OAO program encouraged increasingly strong consensus within the astronomical community that the LST should be a major goal. In 1970, NASA established two committees, one to plan the engineering side of the space telescope project, and the other to determine the scientific goals of the mission. Once these had been established, the next hurdle for NASA was to obtain funding for the instrument, which would be far more costly than any Earth-based telescope. TheU.S. Congressquestioned many aspects of the proposed budget for the telescope and forced cuts in the budget for the planning stages, which at the time consisted of very detailed studies of potential instruments and hardware for the telescope. In 1974,public spendingcuts led to Congress deleting all funding for the telescope project.[25]
In 1977, then NASA AdministratorJames C. Fletcherproposed a token $5million for Hubble in NASA's budget. Then NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science,Noel Hinners, instead cut all funding for Hubble, gambling that this would galvanize the scientific community into fighting for full funding. As Hinners recalls:[26]
It was clear that year that we weren't going to be able to get a full-up start. There was some opposition on [Capitol] Hill to getting a new start on [Hubble]. It was driven, in large part as I recall, by the budget situation. Jim Fletcher proposed that we put in five million as a placeholder. I didn't like that idea. It was, in today's vernacular, a "sop" to the astronomy community. "There's something in there, so all is well".
I figured in my own little head that to get that community energized we'd be better off zeroing it out. Then they would say, "Whoa, we're in deep trouble", and it would marshal the troops. So I advocated that we not put anything in. I don't remember any of the detailed discussions or whether there were any, but Jim went along with that so we zeroed it out. It had, from my perspective, the desired impact of stimulating the astronomy community to renew their efforts on the lobbying front. While I like to think in hindsight it was a brilliant political move, I'm not sure I thought it through all that well. It was something that was spur of the moment.
[...] five million would let them think that all is well anyway, but it's not. So let's give them a message. My own thinking, get them stimulated to get into action. Zeroing it out would certainly give that message. I think it was as simple as that. Didn't talk to anybody else about doing it first, just, "Let's go do that". Voila, it worked. Don't know whether I'd do that again.
The political ploy worked. In response to Hubble being zeroed out of NASA's budget, a nationwide lobbying effort was coordinated among astronomers. Many astronomers metcongressmenandsenatorsin person, and large-scale letter-writing campaigns were organized. TheNational Academy of Sciencespublished a report emphasizing the need for a space telescope, and eventually, the Senate agreed to half the budget that had originally been approved by Congress.[27]
The funding issues led to a reduction in the scale of the project, with the proposed mirror diameter reduced from 3 m to 2.4 m, both to cut costs[28]and to allow a more compact and effective configuration for the telescope hardware. A proposed precursor 1.5 m (4 ft 11 in) space telescope to test the systems to be used on the main satellite was dropped, and budgetary concerns also prompted collaboration with the European Space Agency (ESA). ESA agreed to provide funding and supply one of the first generation instruments for the telescope, as well as thesolar cellsthat would power it, and staff to work on the telescope in the United States, in return for European astronomers being guaranteed at least 15% of the observing time on the telescope.[29]Congress eventually approved funding of $36million for 1978, and the design of the LST began in earnest, aiming for a launch date of 1983.[27]In 1983, the telescope was named afterEdwin Hubble,[30]who confirmed one of the greatest scientific discoveries of the 20th century, made byGeorges Lemaître, that theuniverseisexpanding.[31]

## Construction and engineering
Once the Space Telescope project had been given the go-ahead, work on the program was divided among many institutions.Marshall Space Flight Center(MSFC) was given responsibility for the design, development, and construction of the telescope, whileGoddard Space Flight Centerwas given overall control of the scientific instruments and ground-control center for the mission.[32]MSFC commissioned the optics companyPerkin-Elmerto design and build theoptical telescope assembly(OTA) and Fine Guidance Sensors for the space telescope.Lockheedwas commissioned to construct and integrate the spacecraft in which the telescope would be housed.[33]

## Optical telescope assembly
Optically, the HST is aCassegrain reflectorofRitchey–Chrétien design, as are most large professional telescopes. This design, with two hyperbolic mirrors, is known for good imaging performance over a wide field of view, with the disadvantage that the mirrors have shapes that are hard to fabricate and test. The mirror and optical systems of the telescope determine the final performance, and they were designed to exacting specifications. Optical telescopes typically have mirrors polished to anaccuracyof about a tenth of thewavelengthofvisible light, but the Space Telescope was to be used for observations from the visible through the ultraviolet (shorter wavelengths) and was specified to bediffraction limitedto take full advantage of the space environment. Therefore, its mirror needed to be polished to an accuracy of 10 nanometers, or about 1/65 of the wavelength of red light.[34]On the long wavelength end, the OTA was not designed with optimum infrared performance in mind, e.g. the mirrors are kept at stable (and warm, about 15°C) temperatures by heaters. This limits Hubble's performance as an infrared telescope.[35]
Perkin-Elmer (PE) intended to use custom-built and extremely sophisticatedcomputer-controlled polishing machinesto grind the mirror to the required shape.[33]However, in case their cutting-edge technology ran into difficulties, NASA demanded that PE sub-contract toKodakto construct a back-up mirror using traditional mirror-polishing techniques.[36](The team of Kodak andItekalso bid on the original mirror polishing work. Their bid called for the two companies to double-check each other's work, which would have almost certainly caught the polishing error that later causedproblems.)[37]The Kodak mirror is now on permanent display at theNational Air and Space Museum.[38][39]An Itek mirror built as part of the effort is now used in the 2.4 m telescope at theMagdalena Ridge Observatory.[40]
Construction of the Perkin-Elmer mirror began in 1979, starting with a blank manufactured byCorningfrom their ultra-low expansion glass. To keep the mirror's weight to a minimum it consisted of top and bottom plates, each 25 mm (0.98 in) thick, sandwiching ahoneycomblattice. Perkin-Elmer simulatedmicrogravityby supporting the mirror from the back with 130 rods that exerted varying amounts of force.[41]This ensured the mirror's final shape would be correct and to specification when deployed. Mirror polishing continued until May 1981. NASA reports at the time questioned Perkin-Elmer's managerial structure, and the polishing began to slip behind schedule and over budget. To save money, NASA halted work on the back-up mirror and moved the launch date of the telescope to October 1984.[42]The mirror was completed by the end of 1981; it was washed using 9,100 L (2,000 imp gal; 2,400 US gal) of hot,deionized waterand then received a reflective coating of 65‑nm‑thickaluminumand a protective coating of 25‑nm‑thickmagnesium fluoride.[35][43]
Doubts continued to be expressed about Perkin-Elmer's competence on a project of this importance, as their budget and timescale for producing the rest of the OTA continued to inflate. In response to a schedule described as "unsettled and changing daily", NASA postponed the launch date of the telescope until April 1985. Perkin-Elmer's schedules continued to slip at a rate of about one month per quarter, and at times delays reached one day for each day of work. NASA was forced to postpone the launch date until March and then September 1986. By this time, the total project budget had risen to $1.175billion.[44]

## Spacecraft systems
The spacecraft in which the telescope and instruments were to be housed was another major engineering challenge. It would have to withstand frequent passages from direct sunlight into the darkness of Earth'sshadow, which would cause major changes in temperature, while being stable enough to allow extremely accurate pointing of the telescope. A shroud ofmulti-layer insulationkeeps the temperature within the telescope stable and surrounds a light aluminum shell in which the telescope and instruments sit. Within the shell, agraphite-epoxyframe keeps the working parts of the telescope firmly aligned.[45]Because graphite composites arehygroscopic, there was a risk that water vapor absorbed by the truss while in Lockheed's clean room would later be expressed in the vacuum of space; resulting in the telescope's instruments being covered by ice. To reduce that risk, a nitrogen gas purge was performed before launching the telescope into space.[46]
As well as electrical power systems, thePointing Control Systemcontrols HST orientation using five types of sensors (magnetic sensors, optical sensors, and six gyroscopes) and two types ofactuators(reaction wheelsandmagnetic torquers).[47]
While construction of the spacecraft in which the telescope and instruments would be housed proceeded somewhat more smoothly than the construction of the OTA, Lockheed experienced some budget and schedule slippage, and by the summer 1985, construction of the spacecraft was 30% over budget and three months behind schedule. An MSFC report said Lockheed tended to rely on NASA directions rather than take their own initiative in the construction.[48]

## Computer systems and data processing
The two initial, primary computers on the HST were the 1.25MHzDF-224system, built by Rockwell Autonetics, which contained three redundant CPUs, and two redundantNSSC-1(NASA Standard Spacecraft Computer, Model 1) systems, developed byWestinghouseand GSFC usingdiode–transistor logic(DTL). A co-processor for the DF-224 was added during Servicing Mission 1 in 1993, which consisted of two redundant strings of an Intel-based 80386 processor with an 80387 math co-processor.[49]The DF-224 and its 386 co-processor were replaced by a 25MHz Intel-based 80486 processor system duringServicing Mission 3Ain 1999.[50]The new computer is 20 times faster, with six times more memory, than theDF-224it replaced. It increases throughput by moving some computing tasks from the ground to the spacecraft and saves money by allowing the use of modern programming languages.[51]
Additionally, some of the science instruments and components had their own embedded microprocessor-based control systems. The MATs (Multiple Access Transponder) components, MAT-1 and MAT-2, use Hughes Aircraft CDP1802CD microprocessors.[52]TheWide Field and Planetary Camera(WFPC) also used anRCA 1802 microprocessor(or possibly the older 1801 version).[53]The WFPC-1 was replaced by theWFPC-2during Servicing Mission 1 in 1993, which was then replaced by theWide Field Camera 3(WFC3) during Servicing Mission 4 in 2009. The upgrade extended Hubble's capability of seeing deeper into the universe and providing images in three broad regions of the spectrum.[54][55]

## Initial instruments
When launched, the HST carried five scientific instruments: the Wide Field and Planetary Camera (WF/PC), Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph (GHRS), High Speed Photometer (HSP), Faint Object Camera (FOC) and the Faint Object Spectrograph (FOS). WF/PC used a radial instrument bay, and the other four instruments were each installed in an axial instrument bay.[56]
WF/PC was a high-resolution imaging device primarily intended for optical observations. It was built by NASA'sJet Propulsion Laboratory, and incorporated a set of 48filtersisolatingspectral linesof particular astrophysical interest. The instrument contained eightcharge-coupled device(CCD) chips divided between two cameras, each using four CCDs. Each CCD has a resolution of 0.64 megapixels.[57]The wide field camera (WFC) covered a large angular field at the expense of resolution, while the planetary camera (PC) took images at a longer effectivefocal lengththan the WF chips, giving it a greater magnification.[56]
TheGoddard High Resolution Spectrograph(GHRS) was aspectrographdesigned to operate in the ultraviolet. It was built by the Goddard Space Flight Center and could achieve aspectral resolutionof 90,000.[58]Also optimized for ultraviolet observations were the FOC and FOS, which were capable of the highest spatial resolution of any instruments on Hubble. Rather than CCDs, these three instruments usedphoton-countingdigiconsas their detectors. The FOC was constructed by ESA, while theUniversity of California, San Diego, andMartin Marietta Corporationbuilt the FOS.[56]
The final instrument was the HSP, designed and built at theUniversity of Wisconsin–Madison. It was optimized for visible and ultraviolet light observations ofvariable starsand other astronomical objects varying in brightness. It could take up to 100,000 measurements per second with aphotometricaccuracy of about 2% or better.[59]
HST's guidance system can also be used as a scientific instrument. Its threeFine Guidance Sensors(FGS) are primarily used to keep the telescope accurately pointed during an observation, but can also be used to carry out extremely accurateastrometry; measurements accurate to within 0.0003 arcseconds have been achieved.[60]

## Ground support
The Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI) is responsible for the scientific operation of the telescope and the delivery of data products to astronomers. STScI is operated by theAssociation of Universities for Research in Astronomy(AURA) and is physically located inBaltimore, Marylandon the Homewood campus ofJohns Hopkins University, one of the 39 U.S. universities and seven international affiliates that make up the AURA consortium. STScI was established in 1981[61][62]after something of a power struggle between NASA and the scientific community at large. NASA had wanted to keep this function in-house, but scientists wanted it to be based in anacademic establishment.[63][64]TheSpace Telescope European Coordinating Facility(ST-ECF), established atGarching bei MünchennearMunichin 1984, provided similar support for European astronomers until 2011, when these activities were moved to the European Space Astronomy Centre.[65]
One complex task that falls to STScI is scheduling observations for the telescope.[66]Hubble is in a low-Earth orbit to enable servicing missions, which results in most astronomical targets beingoccultedby the Earth for slightly less than half of each orbit. Observations cannot take place when the telescope passes through theSouth Atlantic Anomalydue to elevatedradiationlevels, and there are also sizable exclusion zones around the Sun (precluding observations ofMercury), Moon and Earth. The solar avoidance angle is about 50°, to keep sunlight from illuminating any part of the OTA. Earth and Moon avoidance keeps bright light out of the FGSs, and keeps scattered light from entering the instruments. If the FGSs are turned off, the Moon and Earth can be observed. Earth observations were used very early in the program to generate flat-fields for the WFPC1 instrument. There is a so-called continuous viewing zone (CVZ), within roughly 24° of Hubble'sorbital poles, in which targets are notoccultedfor long periods.[67][68][69]
Due to theprecessionof the orbit, the location of the CVZ moves slowly over a period of eight weeks. Because thelimbof the Earth is always within about 30° of regions within the CVZ, the brightness of scatteredearthshinemay be elevated for long periods during CVZ observations. Hubble orbits in low Earth orbit at an altitude of approximately 540 kilometers (340 mi) and an inclination of 28.5°.[5]The position along its orbit changes over time in a way that is not accurately predictable. The density of the upper atmosphere varies according to many factors, and this means Hubble's predicted position for six weeks' time could be in error by up to 4,000 km (2,500 mi). Observation schedules are typically finalized only a few days in advance, as a longer lead time would mean there was a chance the target would be unobservable by the time it was due to be observed.[70]Engineering support for HST is provided by NASA and contractor personnel at the Goddard Space Flight Center inGreenbelt, Maryland, 48 km (30 mi) south of the STScI. Hubble's operation is monitored 24 hours per day by four teams of flight controllers who make up Hubble's Flight Operations Team.[66]

## Challengerdisaster, delays, and eventual launch
By January 1986, the planned launch date for Hubble that October looked feasible, but theChallengerdisasterbrought the U.S. space program to a halt, grounded the Shuttle fleet, and forced the launch to be postponed for several years. During this delay the telescope was kept in a clean room, powered up and purged with nitrogen, until a launch could be rescheduled. This costly situation (about $6million per month) pushed the overall costs of the project higher. However, this delay allowed time for engineers to perform extensive tests, swap out a possibly failure-prone battery, and make other improvements.[71]Furthermore, the ground software needed to control Hubble was not ready in 1986, and was barely ready by the 1990 launch.[72]Following the resumption of shuttle flights,Space ShuttleDiscoverysuccessfully launched the Hubble on April 24, 1990, as part of the STS-31 mission.[73]
At launch, NASA had spent approximately $4.7 billion in inflation-adjusted 2010 dollars on the project.[74]Hubble's cumulative costs are estimated to be about $11.3billion in 2015 dollars, which include all subsequent servicing costs, but not ongoing operations, making it the most expensive science mission in NASA history.[75]

## List of Hubble instruments
Hubble accommodates five science instruments at a given time, plus theFine Guidance Sensors, which are mainly used for aiming the telescope but are occasionally used for scientificastrometrymeasurements. Early instruments were replaced with more advanced ones during the Shuttle servicing missions. COSTAR was a corrective optics device rather than a science instrument, but occupied one of the four axial instrument bays.
Since the final servicing mission in 2009, the four active instruments have been ACS, COS, STIS and WFC3. NICMOS is kept in hibernation, but may be revived if WFC3 were to fail in the future.
Of the former instruments, three (COSTAR, FOS and WFPC2) are displayed in the SmithsonianNational Air and Space Museum.[76][77][78]The FOC is in theDorniermuseum, Germany.[79]The HSP is in the Space Place at theUniversity of Wisconsin–Madison.[80]The first WFPC was dismantled, and some components were then re-used in WFC3.[81][82]

## Flawed mirror
Within weeks of the launch of the telescope, the returned images indicated a serious problem with the optical system. Although the first images appeared to be sharper than those of ground-based telescopes, Hubble failed to achieve a final sharp focus and the best image quality obtained was drastically lower than expected. Images ofpoint sourcesspread out over a radius of more than one arcsecond, instead of having apoint spread function(PSF) concentrated within a circle 0.1arcseconds(485nrad) in diameter, as had been specified in the design criteria.[83][84]
Analysis of the flawed images revealed that the primary mirror had been polished to the wrong shape. Although it was believed to be one of the most preciselyfiguredoptical mirrors ever made, smooth to about 10 nanometers,[34]the outer perimeter was too flat by about 2200 nanometers (about1⁄450mm or1⁄11000inch).[85]This difference was catastrophic, introducing severe spherical aberration, a flaw in which light reflecting off the edge of a mirrorfocuseson a different point from the light reflecting off its center.[86]
The effect of the mirror flaw on scientific observations depended on the particular observation. The core of the aberrated PSF was sharp enough to permit high-resolution observations of bright objects, and spectroscopy of point sources was affected only through a sensitivity loss; however, the loss of light to the large, out-of-focus halo severely reduced the usefulness of the telescope for faint objects or high-contrast imaging. This meant nearly all the cosmological programs were essentially impossible, since they required observation of exceptionally faint objects.[86]This led politicians to question NASA's competence, scientists to rue the cost which could have gone to more productive endeavors, and comedians to make jokes about NASA and the telescope. In the 1991 comedyThe Naked Gun 2½: The Smell of Fear, in a scene where historical disasters are displayed, Hubble is pictured with theTitanicand theHindenburg.[87][88]Nonetheless, during the first three years of the Hubble mission, before the optical corrections, the telescope carried out a large number of productive observations of less demanding targets.[89]The error was well characterized and stable, enabling astronomers to partially compensate for the defective mirror by using sophisticatedimage processingtechniques such asdeconvolution.[90]

## Origin of the problem
A commission headed byLew Allen, director of theJet Propulsion Laboratory, was established to determine how the error could have arisen. The Allen Commission found that a reflectivenull corrector, a testing device used to achieve a properly shaped non-spherical mirror, had been incorrectly assembled. (One lens was out of position by 1.3 mm (0.051 in).)[91]During the initial grinding and polishing of the mirror,Perkin-Elmeranalyzed its surface with two conventional refractive null correctors. However, for the final manufacturing step (figuring), they switched to the custom-built reflective null corrector, designed explicitly to meet very strict tolerances. The incorrect assembly of this device resulted in the mirror being ground very precisely but to the wrong shape. During fabrication, a few tests using conventional null correctors correctly reportedspherical aberration. But these results were dismissed, thus missing the opportunity to catch the error, because the reflective null corrector was considered more accurate.[92]
The commission blamed the failings primarily on Perkin-Elmer. Relations between NASA and the optics company had been severely strained during the telescope construction, due to frequent schedule slippage and cost overruns. NASA found that Perkin-Elmer did not review or supervise the mirror construction adequately, did not assign its best optical scientists to the project (as it had for the prototype), and in particular did not involve the optical designers in the construction and verification of the mirror. While the commission heavily criticized Perkin-Elmer for these managerial failings, NASA was also criticized for not picking up on the quality control shortcomings, such as relying totally on test results from a single instrument.[93]

## Design of a solution
Many feared that Hubble would be abandoned.[94]The design of the telescope had always incorporated servicing missions, and astronomers immediately began to seek potential solutions to the problem that could be applied at the first servicing mission, scheduled for 1993. While Kodak had ground a back-up mirror for Hubble, it would have been impossible to replace the mirror in orbit, and too expensive and time-consuming to bring the telescope back to Earth for a refit. Instead, the fact that the mirror had been ground so precisely to the wrong shape led to the design of new optical components with exactly the same error but in the opposite sense, to be added to the telescope at the servicing mission, effectively acting as "spectacles" to correct the spherical aberration.[95][96]
The first step was a precise characterization of the error in the main mirror. Working backwards from images of point sources, astronomers determined that theconic constantof the mirror as built was−1.01390±0.0002, instead of the intended−1.00230.[97][98]The same number was also derived by analyzing the null corrector used by Perkin-Elmer to figure the mirror, as well as by analyzinginterferogramsobtained during ground testing of the mirror.[99]
Because of the way the HST's instruments were designed, two different sets of correctors were required. The design of the Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2, already planned to replace the existing WF/PC, included relay mirrors to direct light onto the four separate charge-coupled device (CCD) chips making up its two cameras. An inverse error built into their surfaces could completely cancel the aberration of the primary. However, the other instruments lacked any intermediate surfaces that could be configured in this way, and so required an external correction device.[100]
TheCorrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement(COSTAR) system was designed to correct the spherical aberration for light focused at the FOC, FOS, and GHRS. It consists of two mirrors in the light path with one ground to correct the aberration.[101]To fit the COSTAR system onto the telescope, one of the other instruments had to be removed, and astronomers selected the High Speed Photometer to be sacrificed.[100]By 2002, all the original instruments requiring COSTAR had been replaced by instruments with their own corrective optics.[102]COSTAR was then removed and returned to Earth in 2009 where it is exhibited at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C.[103]The area previously used by COSTAR is now occupied by theCosmic Origins Spectrograph.[104]

## Servicing overview
Hubble was designed to accommodate regular servicing and equipment upgrades while in orbit. Instruments and limited life items were designed asorbital replacement units.[105]Five servicing missions (SM 1, 2, 3A, 3B, and 4) were flown by NASASpace Shuttles, the first in December 1993 and the last in May 2009.[106]Servicing missions were delicate operations that began with maneuvering to intercept the telescope in orbit and carefully retrieving it with the shuttle'smechanical arm. The necessary work was then carried out in multiple tetheredspacewalksover a period of four to five days. After a visual inspection of the telescope, astronauts conducted repairs, replaced failed or degraded components, upgraded equipment, and installed new instruments. Once work was completed, the telescope was redeployed, typically after boosting to a higher orbit to address theorbital decaycaused by atmosphericdrag.[107]

## Servicing Mission 1
The first Hubble servicing mission was scheduled for 1993 before the mirror problem was discovered. It assumed greater importance, as the astronauts would need to do extensive work to install corrective optics; failure would have resulted in either abandoning Hubble or accepting its permanent disability. Other components failed before the mission, causing the repair cost to rise to $500million (not including the cost of the shuttle flight). A successful repair would help demonstrate the viability of buildingSpace Station Alpha.[108]
STS-49in 1992 demonstrated the difficulty of space work. While its rescue ofIntelsat 603received praise, the astronauts had taken possibly reckless risks in doing so. Neither the rescue nor the unrelated assembly of prototype space station components occurred as the astronauts had trained, causing NASA to reassess planning and training, including for the Hubble repair. The agency assigned to the missionStory Musgrave(who had worked on satellite repair procedures since 1976) and six other experienced astronauts, including two from STS-49. The first mission director sinceProject Apollo[clarification needed]would coordinate a crew with 16 previous shuttle flights. The astronauts were trained to use about a hundred specialized tools.[109]
Heat had been the problem on prior spacewalks, which occurred in sunlight. Hubble needed to be repaired out of sunlight. Musgrave discovered during vacuum training, seven months before the mission, that spacesuit gloves did not sufficiently protect against the cold of space. AfterSTS-57confirmed the issue in orbit, NASA quickly changed equipment, procedures, and flight plan. Seven total mission simulations occurred before launch, the most thorough preparation in shuttle history. No complete Hubble mockup existed, so the astronauts studied many separate models (including one at the Smithsonian) and mentally combined their varying and contradictory details.[110]
Service Mission 1 flew aboardEndeavourin December 1993, and involved installation of several instruments and other equipment over ten days. Most importantly, theHigh Speed Photometerwas replaced with theCOSTARcorrective optics package, and WF/PC was replaced with theWide Field and Planetary Camera 2(WFPC2) with an internal optical correction system. Thesolar arraysand their drive electronics were also replaced, as well as four gyroscopes in the telescope pointing system, two electrical control units and other electrical components, and two magnetometers. The onboard computers were upgraded with addedcoprocessors, and Hubble's orbit was boosted.[85]
On January 13, 1994, NASA declared the mission a complete success and showed the first sharper images.[111]The mission was one of the most complex performed to that date, involving five longextra-vehicular activityperiods. Its success was a boon for NASA, as well as for the astronomers who now had a more capable space telescope.[77][112]

## Servicing Mission 2
Servicing Mission 2, flown byDiscoveryin February 1997, replaced the GHRS and the FOS with theSpace Telescope Imaging Spectrograph(STIS) and theNear Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer(NICMOS), replaced an Engineering and Science Tape Recorder with a new Solid State Recorder, and repaired thermal insulation.[113]NICMOS contained aheat sinkof solidnitrogento reduce thethermal noisefrom the instrument, but shortly after it was installed, an unexpectedthermal expansionresulted in part of the heat sink coming into contact with an optical baffle. This led to an increased warming rate for the instrument and reduced its original expected lifetime of 4.5 years to about two years.[114]

## Servicing Mission 3A
Servicing Mission 3A, flown byDiscovery, took place in December 1999, and was a split-off from Servicing Mission3 after three of the six onboard gyroscopes had failed. The fourth failed a few weeks before the mission, rendering the telescope incapable of performing scientific observations. The mission replaced all sixgyroscopes, replaced a Fine Guidance Sensor and the computer, installed a Voltage/temperature Improvement Kit (VIK) to prevent battery overcharging, and replaced thermal insulation blankets.[115]

## Servicing Mission 3B
Servicing Mission 3B flown byColumbiain March 2002 saw the installation of a new instrument, with the FOC (which, except for the Fine Guidance Sensors when used for astrometry, was the last of the original instruments) being replaced by theAdvanced Camera for Surveys(ACS). This meant COSTAR was no longer required, since all new instruments had built-in correction for the main mirror aberration.[102]The mission also revived NICMOS by installing a closed-cycle cooler[114]and replaced the solar arrays for the second time, providing 30 percent more power.[116]

## Servicing Mission 4
Plans called for Hubble to be serviced in February 2005, but theColumbiadisasterin 2003, in which the orbiter disintegrated on re-entry into the atmosphere, had wide-ranging effects to the Hubble program and other NASA missions. NASA AdministratorSean O'Keefedecided all future shuttle missions had to be able to reach the safe haven of theInternational Space Stationshould in-flight problems develop. As no shuttles were capable of reaching both HST and the space station during the same mission, future crewed service missions were canceled.[117]This decision was criticized by numerous astronomers who felt Hubble was valuable enough to merit the human risk.[118]HST's planned successor, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), by 2004 was not expected to launch until at least 2011. JWST was eventually launched in December 2021.[119]A gap in space-observing capabilities between a decommissioning of Hubble and the commissioning of a successor was of major concern to many astronomers, given the significant scientific impact of HST.[120]The consideration that JWST will not be located in low Earth orbit, and therefore cannot be easily upgraded or repaired in the event of an early failure, only made concerns more acute. On the other hand, NASA officials were concerned that continuing to service Hubble would consume funds from other programs and delay the JWST.[121]
In January 2004, O'Keefe said he would review his decision to cancel the final servicing mission to HST, due to public outcry and requests from Congress for NASA to look for a way to save it. The National Academy of Sciences convened an official panel, which recommended in July 2004 that the HST should be preserved despite the apparent risks. Their report urged "NASA should take no actions that would preclude a space shuttle servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope".[122]In August 2004, O'Keefe asked Goddard Space Flight Center to prepare a detailed proposal for a robotic service mission. These plans were later canceled, the robotic mission being described as "not feasible".[123]In late 2004, several Congressional members, led by SenatorBarbara Mikulski, held public hearings and carried on a fight with much public support (including thousands of letters from school children across the U.S.) to get the Bush Administration and NASA to reconsider the decision to drop plans for a Hubble rescue mission.[124]
The nomination in April 2005 of a new NASA Administrator,Michael D. Griffin, changed the situation, as Griffin stated he would consider a crewed servicing mission.[125]Soon after his appointment Griffin authorized Goddard to proceed with preparations for a crewed Hubble maintenance flight, saying he would make the final decision after the next two shuttle missions. In October 2006 Griffin gave the final go-ahead, and the 11-day mission byAtlantiswas scheduled for October 2008. Hubble's main data-handling unit failed in September 2008,[126]halting all reporting of scientific data until its back-up was brought online on October 25, 2008.[127]Since a failure of the backup unit would leave the HST helpless, the service mission was postponed to incorporate a replacement for the primary unit.[126]
Servicing Mission 4 (SM4), flown byAtlantisin May 2009, was the last scheduled shuttle mission for HST.[104][128]SM4 installed the replacement data-handling unit, repaired the ACS and STIS systems, installed improvednickel–hydrogen batteries, and replaced other components including all six gyroscopes. SM4 also installed two new observation instruments: Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3) and theCosmic Origins Spectrograph(COS)[129]and theSoft Capture and Rendezvous System, which will enable the future rendezvous, capture, and safe disposal of Hubble by either a crewed or robotic mission.[130]Except for the ACS'sHigh Resolution Channel, which could not be repaired and was disabled,[131][132][133]the work accomplished during SM4 rendered the telescope fully functional.[104]

## Major projects
Since the start of the program, a number of research projects have been carried out, some of them almost solely with Hubble, others coordinated facilities such asChandra X-ray ObservatoryandESO'sVery Large Telescope. Although the Hubble observatory is nearing the end of its life, there are still major projects scheduled for it. One example is the current (2022) ULLYSES project (Ultraviolet Legacy Library of Young Stars as Essential Standards) which will last for three years to observe a set of high- and low-mass young stars and will shed light on star formation and composition. Another is the OPAL project (Outer Planet Atmospheres Legacy), which is focussed on understanding the evolution and dynamics of the atmosphere of the outer planets (such as Jupiter and Uranus) by making baseline observations over an extended period.[134]

## Cosmic Assembly Near-infrared Deep Extragalactic Legacy Survey
In an August 2013 press release,CANDELSwas referred to as "the largest project in the history of Hubble". The survey "aims to explore galactic evolution in the early Universe, and the first seeds of cosmic structure at less than one billion years after the Big Bang."[135]The CANDELS project site describes the survey's goals as the following:[136]
The Cosmic Assembly Near-IR Deep Extragalactic Legacy Survey is designed to document the first third of galactic evolution from z = 8 to 1.5 via deep imaging of more than 250,000 galaxies with WFC3/IR and ACS. It will also find the first Type Ia SNe beyond z > 1.5 and establish their accuracy as standard candles for cosmology. Five premier multi-wavelength sky regions are selected; each has multi-wavelength data from Spitzer and other facilities, and has extensive spectroscopy of the brighter galaxies. The use of five widely separated fields mitigates cosmic variance and yields statistically robust and complete samples of galaxies down to 109solar masses out to z ~ 8.

## Frontier Fields program
The program, officially named "Hubble Deep Fields Initiative 2012", is aimed to advance the knowledge of earlygalaxy formationby studying high-redshift galaxies inblank fieldswith the help ofgravitational lensingto see the "faintest galaxies in the distant universe".[137]The Frontier Fields web page describes the goals of the program being:

## Cosmic Evolution Survey (COSMOS)
TheCosmic Evolution Survey(COSMOS)[139]is an astronomical survey designed to probe the formation and evolution of galaxies as a function of both cosmic time (redshift) and the local galaxy environment. The survey covers a two square degree equatorial field with spectroscopy and X-ray to radio imaging by most of the major space-based telescopes and a number of large ground based telescopes,[140]making it a key focus region of extragalactic astrophysics. COSMOS was launched in 2006 as the largest project pursued by the Hubble Space Telescope at the time, and still is the largest continuous area of sky covered for the purposes of mapping deep space inblank fields, 2.5 times the area of the moon on the sky and 17 times larger than the largest of the CANDELS regions. The COSMOS scientific collaboration that was forged from the initial COSMOS survey is the largest and longest-running extragalactic collaboration, known for its collegiality and openness. The study of galaxies in their environment can be done only with large areas of the sky, larger than a half square degree.[141]More than two million galaxies are detected, spanning 90% of the age of theUniverse. The COSMOS collaboration is led byCaitlin Casey,Jeyhan Kartaltepe, and Vernesa Smolcic and involves more than 200 scientists in a dozen countries.[139]

## Cluster Lensing and Supernova survey with Hubble
TheCluster Lensing and Supernova survey with Hubble(CLASH) was a Treasury Program from 2010 to 2013 conducted by the Hubble Space Telescope to observe 25 massive galaxy clusters by using gravitational lensing. CLASH aimed to examine the distribution of dark matter and dark energy in massive galaxy clusters with the new instruments installed in 2009. Imagery showing the effects of gravitational lensing is one means of detecting dark matter and dark energy, and CLASH focused on trying to gain a better understanding of both mysterious topics.[142]

## Photomosaic of the Andromeda Galaxy
ThePanchromatic Hubble Andromeda Treasury and Panchromatic Hubble Andromeda Southern Treasury(PHAT and PHAST) were observations done by Hubble from July 2010 to October 2013 to map the northern half of theAndromeda Galaxyand from December 2021 to January 2024 to map the southern half. Andromeda is the nearest large galaxy to the Milky Way Galaxy and Hubble created the highest resolution and most detailedphotomosaicever of Andromeda. Two hundred million stars can be seen in this combined image of both Treasury Programs out of a total one trillion stars in Andromeda. Each star looks like a grain of sand. The northern half, PHAT, was mapped in near-ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared wavelengths in 828 orbits and was released in January 2015. The southern half, PHAST, was mapped in near-ultraviolet and visible wavelengths in 195 orbits and was released in January 2025. Observing Andromeda in this detail is the best alternative to observing the Milky Way Galaxy because Earth is within the Milky Way and cannot observe most of the Milky Way due to thegalaxy itself blocking observationsof 20% of the sky and most of the galaxy. To achieve this mosaic 1,023 Hubble orbits were needed. The mosaic image is made up of at least 2.5billion pixels.[144][145][146][147]

## Proposal process
Anyone can apply for time on the telescope; there are no restrictions on nationality or academic affiliation, but funding for analysis is available only to U.S. institutions.[148]Competition for time on the telescope is intense, with about one-fifth of the proposals submitted in each cycle earning time on the schedule.[149][150]
Calls for proposals are issued roughly annually, with time allocated for a cycle lasting about one year. Proposals are divided into several categories; "general observer" proposals are the most common, covering routine observations. "Snapshot observations" are those in which targets require only 45 minutes or less of telescope time, including overheads such as acquiring the target. Snapshot observations are used to fill in gaps in the telescope schedule that cannot be filled by regular general observer programs.[151]
Astronomers may make "Target of Opportunity" proposals, in which observations are scheduled if a transient event covered by the proposal occurs during the scheduling cycle. In addition, up to 10% of the telescope time is designated "director's discretionary" (DD) time. Astronomers can apply to use DD time at any time of year, and it is typically awarded for study of unexpected transient phenomena such as supernovae.[152]
Other uses of DD time have included the observations that led to views of the Hubble Deep Field and Hubble Ultra Deep Field, and in the first four cycles of telescope time, observations that were carried out by amateur astronomers.[153][154]
In 2012, the ESA held a contest for public image processing of Hubble data to encourage the discovery of "hidden treasures" in the raw Hubble data.[155][156]

## Use by amateur astronomers
The first director of STScI,Riccardo Giacconi, announced in 1986 that he intended to devote some of his director discretionary time to allowing amateur astronomers to use the telescope. The total time to be allocated was only a few hours per cycle but excited great interest among amateur astronomers.[153][154]
Proposals for amateur time were stringently reviewed by a committee of amateur astronomers, and time was awarded only to proposals that were deemed to have genuine scientific merit, did not duplicate proposals made by professionals, and required the unique capabilities of the space telescope. Thirteen amateur astronomers were awarded time on the telescope, with observations being carried out between 1990 and 1997.[153]One such study was "Transition Comets – UV Search for OH". The first proposal, "A Hubble Space Telescope Study of Posteclipse Brightening and Albedo Changes on Io", was published inIcarus,[157]a journal devoted to solar system studies. A second study from another group of amateurs was also published inIcarus.[158]After that time, however, budget reductions at STScI made the support of work by amateur astronomers untenable, and no additional amateur programs have been carried out.[153][154]
Regular Hubble proposals still include findings or discovered objects by amateurs andcitizen scientists. These observations are often in a collaboration with professional astronomers. One of the earliest such observations is theGreat White Spotof 1990[159]on planet Saturn, discovered by amateur astronomer S. Wilber[160]and observed by HST under a proposal by J. Westphal (Caltech).[161][162]Later professional-amateur observations by Hubble include discoveries by theGalaxy Zooproject, such asVoorwerpjesandGreen Pea galaxies.[163][164]The "Gems of the Galaxies" program is based on a list of objects byGalaxy Zoovolunteers that was shortened with the help of an online vote.[165]Additionally there are observations ofminor planetsdiscovered by amateur astronomers, such as2I/Borisovand changes in the atmosphere of thegas giantsJupiter and Saturn or theice giantsUranus and Neptune.[166][167]In the pro-am collaborationbackyard worldsthe HST was used to observe aplanetary mass object, calledWISE J0830+2837. The non-detection by the HST helped to classify this peculiar object.[168]

## Key projects
In the early 1980s, NASA and STScI convened four panels to discuss key projects. These were projects that were both scientifically important and would require significant telescope time, which would be explicitly dedicated to each project. This guaranteed that these particular projects would be completed early, in case the telescope failed sooner than expected. The panels identified three such projects: 1) a study of the nearby intergalactic medium using quasarabsorption linesto determine the properties of theintergalactic mediumand the gaseous content of galaxies and groups of galaxies;[169]2) a medium deep survey using the Wide Field Camera to take data whenever one of the other instruments was being used[170]and 3) a project to determine theHubble constantwithin ten percent by reducing the errors, both external and internal, in the calibration of the distance scale.[171]

## Important discoveries
Hubble has helped resolve some long-standing problems in astronomy, while also raising new questions. Some results have required newtheoriesto explain them.

## Age and expansion of the universe
Among its primary mission targets was to measure distances toCepheid variablestars more accurately than ever before, and thusconstrain the valueof theHubble constant, the measure of the rate at which the universe is expanding, which is also related to its age. Before the launch of HST, estimates of the Hubble constant typically haderrorsof up to 50%, but Hubble measurements of Cepheid variables in theVirgo Clusterand other distant galaxy clusters provided a measured value with an accuracy of ±10%, which is consistent with other more accurate measurements made since Hubble's launch using other techniques.[172]The estimated age of the universe is now 13.7billion years. (Before the Hubble Telescope it was ten to twenty billion.)[173]
Astronomers from theHigh-z Supernova Search Teamand theSupernova Cosmology Projectused ground-based telescopes and HST to observe distantsupernovaeand uncovered evidence that, far from decelerating under the influence ofgravity, the expansion of the universe is insteadaccelerating. Three members of these two groups have subsequently been awardedNobel Prizesfor their discovery.[174]The cause of this acceleration remains poorly understood;[175]the term used for the currently-unknown cause isdark energy, signifying that it is dark (unable to be directly seen and detected) to our current scientific instruments.[176]

## Black holes
The high-resolution spectra and images provided by the HST have been especially well-suited to establishing the prevalence ofblack holesin the center of nearby galaxies. While it had been hypothesized in the early 1960s that black holes would be found at the centers of some galaxies, and astronomers in the 1980s identified a number of good black hole candidates, work conducted with Hubble shows that black holes are probably common to the centers of all galaxies.[177]The Hubble programs further established that the masses of the nuclear black holes and properties of the galaxies are closely related.[178][179]

## Extending visible wavelength images
A unique window on the Universe enabled by Hubble are theHubble Deep Field,Hubble Ultra-Deep Field, andHubble Extreme Deep Fieldimages, which used Hubble's unmatched sensitivity at visible wavelengths to create images of small patches of sky that are the deepest ever obtained at optical wavelengths. The images reveal galaxies billions of light years away, thereby providing information about the early Universe, and have accordingly generated a wealth of scientific papers. The Wide Field Camera3 improved the view of these fields in the infrared and ultraviolet, supporting the discovery of some of the most distant objects yet discovered, such asMACS0647-JD.[180]
The non-standard objectSCP 06F6was discovered by the Hubble Space Telescope in February 2006.[181][182]
On March 3, 2016, researchers using Hubble data announced the discovery of the farthest confirmed galaxy to date:GN-z11, which Hubble observed as it existed roughly 400million years after the Big Bang.[183]The Hubble observations occurred on February 11, 2015, and April 3, 2015, as part of theCANDELS/GOODS-North surveys.[184][185]

## Solar System discoveries
The collision ofComet Shoemaker-Levy 9withJupiterin 1994 was fortuitously timed for astronomers, coming just a few months after Servicing Mission1 had restored Hubble's optical performance. Hubble images of theplanetwere sharper than any taken since the passage ofVoyager 2in 1979, and were crucial in studying the dynamics of the collision of a large comet with Jupiter, an event believed to occur once every few centuries.[186]
In March 2015, researchers announced that measurements of aurorae aroundGanymede, one of Jupiter's moons, revealed that it has a subsurface ocean. Using Hubble to study the motion of its aurorae, the researchers determined that a large saltwater ocean was helping to suppress the interaction between Jupiter's magnetic field and that of Ganymede. The ocean is estimated to be 100 km (60 mi) deep, trapped beneath a 150 km (90 mi) ice crust.[187][188]
HST has also been used to study objects in the outer reaches of the Solar System, including the dwarf planetsPluto,[189]Eris,[190]andSedna.[191]During June and July 2012, U.S. astronomers using Hubble discoveredStyx, a tiny fifth moon orbiting Pluto.[192]
From June to August 2015, Hubble was used tosearchfor aKuiper beltobject (KBO) target for theNew HorizonsKuiper Belt Extended Mission (KEM) when similar searches with ground telescopes failed to find a suitable target.[193]This resulted in the discovery of at least five new KBOs, including the eventual KEM target,486958 Arrokoth, thatNew Horizonsperformed a close fly-by of on January 1, 2019.[194][195][196]
In April 2022 NASA announced that astronomers were able to use images from HST to determine the size of the nucleus of cometC/2014 UN271 (Bernardinelli–Bernstein), which is the largest icy comet nucleus ever seen by astronomers. The nucleus of C/2014 UN271 has an estimated mass of fifty trillion tons which is fifty times the mass of other known comets in the Solar System.[197]

## Supernova reappearance
On December 11, 2015, Hubble captured an image of the first-ever predicted reappearance of a supernova, dubbed "Refsdal", which was calculated using different mass models of a galaxy cluster whose gravity iswarpingthe supernova's light. The supernova was previously seen in November 2014 behind galaxy clusterMACS J1149.5+2223as part of Hubble's Frontier Fields program. The light from the cluster took roughly five billion years to reach Earth, while the light from the supernova behind it took five billion more years than that, as measured by their respectiveredshifts. Because of the gravitational effect of the galaxy cluster, four images of the supernova appeared instead of one, an example of anEinstein cross. Based on early lens models, a fifth image was predicted to reappear by the end of 2015.[199]Refsdal reappeared as predicted in 2015.[200]

## Mass and size of Milky Way
In March 2019, observations from Hubble and data from the European Space Agency'sGaiaspace observatory were combined to determine that the mass of theMilky Way Galaxyis approximately 1.5trillion times the mass of the Sun, a value intermediate between prior estimates.[201]

## Other discoveries
Other discoveries made with Hubble data include proto-planetary disks (proplyds) in theOrion Nebula;[202]evidence for the presence ofextrasolar planetsaround Sun-like stars;[203]and the optical counterparts of the still-mysteriousgamma-ray bursts.[204]Usinggravitational lensing, Hubble observed a galaxy designatedMACS 2129-1approximately ten billion lightyears from Earth. MACS 2129-1 subverted expectations about galaxies in which new star formation had ceased, a significant result for understanding the formation ofelliptical galaxies.[205]
In 2022 Hubble detected the light of the farthest individual star ever seen to date. The star,WHL0137-LS(nicknamedEarendel), existed within the first billion years after theBig Bang. It will be observed by NASA's James Webb Space Telescope to confirm Earendel is indeed a star.[206]

## Impact on astronomy
Many objective measures show the positive impact of Hubble data on astronomy. As of 2025, over 22,000papersbased on Hubble data have been published in peer-reviewed journals,[207]and countless more have appeared in conferenceproceedings. Looking at papers several years after their publication, about one-third of all astronomy papers have nocitations, while only two percent of papers based on Hubble data have no citations. On average, a paper based on Hubble data receives about twice as many citations as papers based on non-Hubble data. Of the 200 papers published each year that receive the most citations, about 10% are based on Hubble data.[208]
Although the HST has clearly helped astronomical research, its financial cost has been large. A study on the relative astronomical benefits of different sizes of telescopes found that while papers based on HST data generate 15 times as many citations as a 4 m (13 ft) ground-based telescope such as theWilliam Herschel Telescope, the HST costs about 100 times as much to build and maintain.[209]
Deciding between building ground- versus space-based telescopes is complex. Even before Hubble was launched, specialized ground-based techniques such asaperture masking interferometryhad obtained higher-resolution optical and infrared images than Hubble would achieve, though restricted to targets about 108times brighter than the faintest targets observed by Hubble.[210][211]Since then, advances inadaptive opticshave extended the high-resolution imaging capabilities of ground-based telescopes to the infrared imaging of faint objects. The usefulness of adaptive optics versus HST observations depends strongly on the particular details of the research questions being asked. In the visible bands, adaptive optics can correct only a relatively small field of view, whereas HST can conduct high-resolution optical imaging over a wider field.[212]Moreover, Hubble can image more faint objects, since ground-based telescopes are affected by the background of scattered light created by the Earth's atmosphere.[213]

## Impact on aerospace engineering
In addition to its scientific results, Hubble has also made significant contributions toaerospace engineering, in particular the performance of systems in low Earth orbit (LEO). These insights result from Hubble's long lifetime on orbit, extensive instrumentation, and return of assemblies to the Earth where they can be studied in detail. In particular, Hubble has contributed to studies of the behavior ofgraphite compositestructures in vacuum, optical contamination from residual gas and human servicing,radiation damageto electronics and sensors, and the long term behavior ofmulti-layer insulation.[214]One lesson learned was that gyroscopes assembled using pressurized oxygen to deliver suspension fluid were prone to failure due to electric wire corrosion. Gyroscopes are now assembled using pressurized nitrogen.[215]Another is that optical surfaces in LEO can have surprisingly long lifetimes; Hubble was only expected to last 15 years before the mirror became unusable, but after 14 years there was no measureable degradation.[118]Finally, Hubble servicing missions, particularly those that serviced components not designed for in-space maintenance, have contributed towards the development of new tools and techniques for on-orbit repair.[216]

## Transmission to Earth
Hubble data was initially stored on the spacecraft. When launched, the storage facilities were old-fashioned reel-to-reeltape drives, but these were replaced bysolid statedata storage facilities during servicing missions2 and 3A. About twice daily, the Hubble Space Telescope radios data to a satellite in thegeosynchronousTracking and Data Relay Satellite System(TDRSS), which then downlinks the science data to one of two 60-foot (18-meter) diameter high-gain microwave antennas located at theWhite Sands Test FacilityinWhite Sands, New Mexico.[150]From there they are sent to the Space Telescope Operations Control Center at Goddard Space Flight Center, and finally to the Space Telescope Science Institute for archiving.[150]Each week, HST downlinks approximately 140 gigabits of data.[2]

## Color images
All images from Hubble aremonochromaticgrayscale, taken through a variety of filters, each passing specific wavelengths of light, and incorporated in each camera. Color images are created by combining separate monochrome images taken through different filters. This process can also createfalse-colorversions of images including infrared and ultraviolet channels, where infrared is typically rendered as a deep red and ultraviolet is rendered as a deep blue.[218][219]

## Archives
All Hubble data is eventually made available via theMikulski Archive for Space TelescopesatSTScI,[220]CADC[221]andESA/ESAC.[222]Data is usually proprietary (available only to theprincipal investigator(PI) and astronomers designated by the PI) for twelve months after being taken. The PI can apply to the director of the STScI to extend or reduce the proprietary period in some circumstances.[223]
Observations made on Director's Discretionary Time are exempt from the proprietary period, and are released to the public immediately. Calibration data such as flat fields anddark framesare also publicly available straight away. All data in the archive is in theFITSformat, which is suitable for astronomical analysis but not for public use.[224]TheHubble Heritage Projectprocesses and releases to the public a small selection of the most striking images inJPEGandTIFFformats.[225]

## Pipeline reduction
Astronomical data taken with CCDs must undergo several calibration steps before they are suitable for astronomical analysis. STScI has developed sophisticated software that automatically calibrates data when they are requested from the archive using the best calibration files available. This "on-the-fly" processing means large data requests can take a day or more to be processed and returned. The process by which data is calibrated automatically is known as "pipeline reduction", and is increasingly common at major observatories. Astronomers may if they wish retrieve the calibration files themselves and run the pipeline reduction software locally. This may be desirable when calibration files other than those selected automatically need to be used.[226]

## Data analysis
Hubble data can be analyzed using many different packages. STScI maintains the custom-madeSpace Telescope Science Data Analysis System(STSDAS) software, which contains all the programs needed to run pipeline reduction on raw data files, as well as many other astronomical image processing tools, tailored to the requirements of Hubble data. The software runs as a module ofIRAF, a popular astronomical data reduction program.[227]

## Outreach activities
NASA considered it important for the Space Telescope to capture the public's imagination, given the considerable contribution oftaxpayersto its construction and operational costs.[228]After the difficult early years when the faulty mirror severely dented Hubble's reputation with the public, the first servicing mission allowed its rehabilitation as the corrected optics produced numerous remarkable images.[77][229]
Several initiatives have helped to keep the public informed about Hubble activities.
In the United States,outreachefforts are coordinated by the Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI) Office for Public Outreach, which was established in 2000 to ensure that U.S. taxpayers saw the benefits of their investment in the space telescope program. To that end, STScI operates the HubbleSite.org website. TheHubble Heritage Project, operating out of the STScI, provides the public with high-quality images of the most interesting and striking objects observed. The Heritage team is composed of amateur and professional astronomers, as well as people with backgrounds outside astronomy, and emphasizes theaestheticnature of Hubble images. The Heritage Project is granted a small amount of time to observe objects which, for scientific reasons, may not have images taken at enough wavelengths to construct a full-color image.[225]
Since 1999, the leading Hubble outreach group in Europe has been theHubble European Space Agency Information Centre(HEIC).[230]This office was established at theSpace Telescope European Coordinating Facilityin Munich, Germany. HEIC's mission is to fulfill HST outreach and education tasks for the European Space Agency. The work is centered on the production of news and photo releases that highlight interesting Hubble results and images. These are often European in origin, and so increase awareness of both ESA's Hubble share (15%) and the contribution of European scientists to the observatory. ESA produces educational material, including avideocastseries called Hubblecast designed to share world-class scientific news with the public.[231]
The Hubble Space Telescope has won two Space Achievement Awards from theSpace Foundation, for its outreach activities, in 2001 and 2010.[232]
A replica of the Hubble Space Telescope is displayed on the courthouse lawn inMarshfield, Missouri, the hometown of namesake Edwin P. Hubble.[233]

## Celebration images
The Hubble Space Telescope celebrated its 20th anniversary in space on April 24, 2010. To commemorate the occasion, NASA, ESA, and the Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI) released an image from theCarina Nebula.[234]
To commemorate Hubble's 25th anniversary in space on April 24, 2015, STScI released images of theWesterlund 2cluster, located about 20,000 light-years (6,100 pc) away in the constellation Carina, through its Hubble 25 website.[235]The European Space Agency created a dedicated 25th anniversary page on its website.[236]In April 2016, a special celebratory image of theBubble Nebulawas released for Hubble's 26th "birthday".[237]

## Gyroscope rotation sensors
HST uses gyroscopes to detect and measure any rotations so it can stabilize itself in orbit and point accurately and steadily at astronomical targets. HST has six of these rate-sensing gyroscopes installed. Three gyroscopes are normally required for operation; observations are still possible with two or one, but the area of sky that can be viewed would be somewhat restricted, and observations requiring very accurate pointing are more difficult.[238]In 2018, the plan was to drop into one-gyroscope mode if fewer than three working gyroscopes were operational. The gyroscopes are part of thePointing Control System, which uses five types of sensors (magnetic sensors, optical sensors, and the gyroscopes) and two types ofactuators(reaction wheelsandmagnetic torquers).[47]
After theColumbiadisasterin 2003, it was unclear whether another servicing mission would be possible, and gyroscope life became a concern again, so engineers developed new software for two-gyroscope and one-gyroscope modes to maximize the potential lifetime. The development was successful, and in 2005, it was decided to switch to two-gyroscope mode for regular telescope operations as a means of extending the lifetime of the mission. The switch to this mode was made in August 2005, leaving Hubble with two gyroscopes in use, two on backup, and two inoperable.[239]One more gyroscope failed in 2007.[240]
By the time of the final repair mission in May 2009, during which all six gyroscopes were replaced (with two new pairs and one refurbished pair), only three were still working. Engineers determined that the gyroscope failures were caused by corrosion of electric wires powering the motor that was initiated by oxygen-pressurized air used to deliver the thick suspending fluid.[215]The new gyroscope models were assembled using pressurized nitrogen[215]and were expected to be much more reliable.[241]In the 2009 servicing mission all six gyroscopes were replaced, and after almost ten years only three gyroscopes failed, and only after exceeding the average expected run time for the design.[242]
Of the six gyroscopes replaced in 2009, three were of the old design susceptible for flex-lead failure, and three were of the new design with a longer expected lifetime. The first of the old-style gyroscopes failed in March 2014, and the second in April 2018. On October 5, 2018, the last of the old-style gyroscopes failed, and one of the new-style gyroscopes was powered-up from standby state. However, that reserve gyroscope did not immediately perform within operational limits, and so the observatory was placed into "safe" mode while scientists attempted to fix the problem.[243][244]NASA tweeted on October 22, 2018, that the "rotation rates produced by the backup gyro have reduced and are now within a normal range. Additional tests [are] to be performed to ensure Hubble can return to science operations with this gyro."[245]
The solution that restored the backup new-style gyroscope to operational range was widely reported as "turning it off and on again".[246]A "running restart" of the gyroscope was performed, but this had no effect, and the final resolution to the failure was more complex. The failure was attributed to an inconsistency in the fluid surrounding the float within the gyroscope, i.e. an air bubble. On October 18, 2018, the Hubble Operations Team directed the spacecraft into a series of maneuvers, moving it in opposite directions in order to mitigate the inconsistency. Only after the maneuvers, and a subsequent set of maneuvers on October 19, did the gyroscope truly operate within its normal range.[247]

## Instruments and electronics
Past servicing missions have exchanged old instruments for new ones, avoiding failure and making new types of science possible. Without servicing missions, all the instruments will eventually fail. In August 2004, the power system of the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) failed, rendering the instrument inoperable. The electronics had originally been fully redundant, but the first set of electronics failed in May 2001.[248]This power supply was fixed during Servicing Mission4 in May 2009.[249]
Similarly, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) main camera primary electronics failed in June 2006, and the power supply for the backup electronics failed on January 27, 2007.[250]Only the instrument's Solar Blind Channel (SBC) was operable using the side-1 electronics. A new power supply for the wide angle channel was added during SM 4, but quick tests revealed this did not help the high resolution channel.[251]The Wide Field Channel (WFC) was returned to service by STS-125 in May 2009 but the High Resolution Channel (HRC) remains offline.[252]
On January 8, 2019, Hubble entered a partial safe mode following suspected hardware problems in its most advanced instrument, the Wide Field Camera 3 instrument. NASA later reported that the cause of the safe mode within the instrument was a detection of voltage levels out of a defined range. On January 15, 2019, NASA said the cause of the failure was a software problem. Engineering data within the telemetry circuits were not accurate. In addition, all other telemetry within those circuits also contained erroneous values indicating that this was a telemetry issue and not a power supply issue. After resetting the telemetry circuits and associated boards the instrument began functioning again. On January 17, 2019, the device was returned to normal operation and on the same day it completed its first science observations.[253][254]

## 2021 power control issue
On June 13, 2021, Hubble's payload computer halted due to a suspected issue with a memory module. An attempt to restart the computer on June 14 failed. Further attempts to switch to one of three other backup memory modules on board the spacecraft failed on June 18. On June 23 and 24, NASA engineers switched Hubble to a backup payload computer, but these operations have failed as well with the same error. On June 28, 2021, NASA announced that it was extending the investigation to other components.[255][256]Scientific operations were suspended while NASA worked to diagnose and resolve the issue.[257][258]After identifying a malfunctioning power control unit (PCU) supplying power to one of Hubble's computers, NASA was able to switch to a backup PCU and bring Hubble back to operational mode on July 16.[259][260][261][262]On October 23, 2021, HST instruments reported missing synchronization messages[263]and went into safe mode.[264]By December 8, 2021, NASA had restored full science operations and was developing updates to make instruments more resilient to missing synchronization messages.[265]

## Orbital decay and controlled reentry
Hubble orbits the Earth in the extremely tenuous upperatmosphere, and over time its orbitdecaysdue todrag. If notreboosted, it will re-enter the Earth's atmosphere within some decades, with the exact date depending on how active the Sun is and its impact on the upper atmosphere. If Hubble were to descend in a completely uncontrolled re-entry, parts of the main mirror and its support structure would probably survive, leaving the potential for damage or even human fatalities.[266]In 2013, deputy project manager James Jeletic projected that Hubble could survive into the 2020s.[4]Based on solar activity and atmospheric drag, or lack thereof, a natural atmospheric reentry for Hubble will occur between 2028 and 2040.[4][267]In June 2016, NASA extended the service contract for Hubble until June 2021.[268]This was later extended until June 2026.[269]
NASA's original plan for safely de-orbiting Hubble was toretrieve it using a Space Shuttle. Hubble would then have most likely been displayed in theSmithsonian Institution. This is no longer possible since theSpace Shuttle fleet has been retired, and would have been unlikely in any case due to the cost of the mission and risk to the crew. Instead, NASA considered adding an external propulsion module to allow controlled re-entry.[270]Ultimately, in 2009, as part of Servicing Mission 4, the last servicing mission by the Space Shuttle, NASA installed the Soft Capture Mechanism (SCM), to enable deorbit by either a crewed or robotic mission. The SCM, together with the Relative Navigation System (RNS), mounted on the Shuttle to collect data to "enable NASA to pursue numerous options for the safe de-orbit of Hubble", constitute the Soft Capture and Rendezvous System (SCRS).[130][271]

## Possible service missions
As of 2017[update], theTrump Administrationwas considering a proposal by theSierra Nevada Corporationto use a crewed version of itsDream Chaserspacecraft to serviceHubblesome time in the 2020s as a continuation of its scientific capabilities and as insurance against any malfunctions in the James Webb Space Telescope.[272]In 2020,John Grunsfeldsaid thatSpaceX Crew DragonorOrioncould perform another repair mission within ten years. While robotic technology is not yet sophisticated enough, he said, with another crewed visit "We could keep Hubble going for another few decades" with new gyros and instruments.[273]
Billionaireprivate astronautJared Isaacmanproposed to fund a servicing mission using SpaceX spacecraft. Though it might save NASA much money, SpaceX and NASA differed on the mission's risk.[274]In September 2022, NASA and SpaceX signed a Space Act Agreement to investigate the possibility of launching a Crew Dragon mission to service and boost Hubble to a higher orbit, possibly extending its lifespan by another 20 years.[275]This mission could have been the second of thePolaris Program, but by June 2024 NASA had rejected a private servicing mission because of potential damage to the observatory.[276][277][278]

## Successors
There is no direct replacement to Hubble as an ultraviolet and visible light space telescope, because near-term space telescopes do not duplicate Hubble's wavelength coverage (near-ultraviolet to near-infrared wavelengths), instead concentrating on the further infrared bands. These bands are preferred for studying high redshift and low-temperature objects, objects generally older and farther away in the universe. These wavelengths are also difficult or impossible to study from the ground, justifying the expense of a space-based telescope. Large ground-based telescopes can image some of the same wavelengths as Hubble, sometimes challenge HST in terms of resolution by usingadaptive optics(AO), have much larger light-gathering power, and can be upgraded more easily, but cannot yet match Hubble's excellent resolution over a wide field of view with the very dark background of space.[212][213]
Plans for a Hubble successor materialized as the Next Generation Space Telescope project, which culminated in plans for the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), the formal successor of Hubble.[279]Very different from a scaled-up Hubble, it is designed to operate colder and farther away from the Earth at the L2Lagrangian point, where thermal and optical interference from the Earth and Moon are lessened. It is not engineered to be fully serviceable (such as replaceable instruments), but the design includes a docking ring to enable visits from other spacecraft.[280]A main scientific goal of JWST is to observe the most distant objects in the universe, beyond the reach of existing instruments. It is expected to detect stars in theearly Universeapproximately 280million years older than stars HST now detects.[281]The telescope is an international collaboration between NASA, the European Space Agency, and theCanadian Space Agencysince 1996,[282]and was launched on December 25, 2021, on anAriane 5rocket.[283]Although JWST is primarily an infrared instrument, its coverage extends down to 600nm wavelength light, or roughly orange in the visible spectrum. A typical human eye can see to about 750nm wavelength light, so there is some overlap with the longest visible wavelength bands, including orange and red light.[284]
A complementary telescope, looking at even longer wavelengths than Hubble or JWST, was the European Space Agency'sHerschel Space Observatory, launched on May 14, 2009. Like JWST, Herschel was not designed to be serviced after launch, and had a mirror substantially larger than Hubble's, but observed only in thefar infraredandsubmillimeter. It needed helium coolant, of which it ran out on April 29, 2013.[285]
Further concepts for advanced 21st-century space telescopes include theLarge Ultraviolet Optical Infrared Surveyor(LUVOIR),[287]a conceptualized 8 to 16.8 meters (310 to 660 inches) optical space telescope that if realized could be a more direct successor to HST, with the ability to observe and photograph astronomical objects in the visible, ultraviolet, and infrared wavelengths, with substantially better resolution than Hubble or the Spitzer Space Telescope. The final planning report, prepared for the 2020Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey, suggested a launch date of 2039.[288]The Decadal Survey eventually recommended that ideas for LUVOIR be combined with theHabitable Exoplanet Observerproposal to devise a new, 6-meter flagship telescope that could launch in the 2040s.[289]
Existing ground-based telescopes, and various proposedExtremely Large Telescopes, can exceed the HST in terms of sheer light-gathering power and diffraction limit due to larger mirrors, but other factors affect telescopes. In some cases, they may be able to match or exceed Hubble in resolution by using adaptive optics (AO). However, AO on large ground-based reflectors will not make Hubble and other space telescopes obsolete. Most AO systems sharpen the view over a very narrow field:Lucky Cam, for example, produces crisp images just 10 to 20 arcseconds wide, whereas Hubble's cameras produce crisp images across a 150-arcsecond (2½ arcminutes) field. Furthermore, space telescopes can study the universe across the entire electromagnetic spectrum, most of which is blocked by Earth's atmosphere. Finally, the background sky is darker in space than on the ground, because air absorbs solar energy during the day and then releases it at night, producing a faint but discernibleairglowthat washes out low-contrast astronomical objects.[290]