## Immanuel Kant
Immanuel Kant[a](bornEmanuel Kant; 22 April 1724 – 12 February 1804) was a Germanphilosopher. Born inKönigsbergin theKingdom of Prussia, he is considered one of the central thinkers of theEnlightenment. His comprehensive and systematic works inepistemology,metaphysics,logic,ethics,aesthetics,political theory, and thephilosophy of religionhave made him one of the most influential and highly discussed figures in modernWestern philosophy.
Kant's philosophy is centered on the human subject and motivated by the desire to secure the possibility of both knowledge and morality against the threats ofskepticismanddeterminism. In theCritique of Pure Reason(1781/1787), Kant argues fortranscendental idealism, the doctrine thatspaceandtimeare mere "forms ofintuition" (German:Anschauung) that structure allexperienceand that we have knowledge only of "appearances" and not of the nature ofthings in themselves. Kant drew a parallel to theCopernican Revolutionin his proposal to think of the objects of experience as conforming to people's spatial and temporal forms ofintuitionand thecategoriesof the understanding, instead of the traditional method of showing how the mind might conform to its objects.
Kant believed thatreasonis the source ofmoralityand that thecategorical imperativebinds all rational agents. He believed that aesthetics arises from a faculty of disinterested judgment. Kant hoped that perpetualpeacecould be secured through an internationalfederationofrepublicanstates andinternational cooperation. Kant believed that true religion is grounded on morality. The exact nature of his religious views is a matter of dispute.[7][8]

## Early life
Immanuel Kant was born on 22 April 1724 into aPrussianGerman family ofLutheranfaith inKönigsberginEast Prussia(nowKaliningrad Oblast, Russia). His mother, Anna Regina Reuter, was born in Königsberg to a father fromNuremberg.[9]Her surname is sometimes erroneously given as Porter. Kant's father, Johann Georg Kant, was a German harness-maker fromMemel,[10]at the time Prussia's most northeastern city (now Klaipėda, Lithuania). Kant believed his family to be of Scottish descent, although this has not been verified by genealogical research.[11]
Kant was baptized as Emanuel, changing the spelling of his name to Immanuel after learningHebrew.[10]He was the fourth of nine children (six of whom reached adulthood).[12]The Kant household stressed thePietistvalues of religious devotion, humility, and a literal interpretation of theBible.[13]Immanuel Kant's early education was strict, punitive, and highly disciplinary, with an emphasis on Latin and religious instruction rather than mathematics and science.[14]In his later years, Kant lived a strictly ordered life. It was said that neighbors would set their clocks by his daily walks.[citation needed]Kant considered marriage two times, first a widow and then aWestphaliangirl, but both times waited too long.[15]Though he never married, he seems to have had a rewarding social life; he was a popular teacher as well as a modestly successful author, even before starting on his major philosophical works.[16]

## Young scholar
Kant demonstrated an early aptitude for study. He first attended theCollegium Fridericianum, from which he graduated at the end of the summer of 1740. In 1740, aged 16, he enrolled at theUniversity of Königsberg, where he would later remain for the rest of his professional life.[17]He studied the philosophy ofGottfried LeibnizandChristian WolffunderMartin Knutzen(Associate Professor of Logic and Metaphysics from 1734 until he died in 1751), arationalistwho was also familiar with developments in British philosophy and science and introduced Kant to the new mathematical physics ofIsaac Newton. Knutzen dissuaded Kant from the theory ofpre-established harmony, which he regarded as "the pillow for the lazy mind".[18]He also dissuaded Kant fromidealism, the idea that reality is purely mental, which most philosophers in the 18th century regarded negatively. The theory oftranscendental idealismthat Kant later included in theCritique of Pure Reasonwas developed partially in opposition to traditional idealism. Kant had contacts with students, colleagues, friends and diners who frequented the localMasonic lodge.[19]His mainpublisher,Johann Friedrich Hartknoch, was also a Freemason.[20]
His father's stroke and subsequent death in 1746 interrupted his studies. Kant left Königsberg shortly after August 1748;[21]he would return there in August 1754.[22]He became a private tutor in the towns surrounding Königsberg, but continued his scholarly research. In 1749, he published his first philosophical work,Thoughts on the True Estimation of Living Forces(written in 1745–1747).[23]

## Early work
Kant is best known for his work in the philosophy of ethics and metaphysics, but he made significant contributions to other disciplines. In 1754, while contemplating a prize question by theBerlin Academyabout the problem of Earth's rotation, he argued that the Moon's gravity would slow down the Earth's spin. He also put forth the argument that gravity would eventually cause the Moon'stidal lockingtocoincidewith the Earth's rotation.[b][25]The next year, he expanded this reasoning to theformation and evolution of the Solar Systemin hisUniversal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens.[25]In 1755, Kant received a license to lecture at the University of Königsberg and began lecturing on a variety of topics including mathematics, physics, logic, and metaphysics. In his 1756 essay on the theory of winds, Kant laid out an original insight into theCoriolis force.[citation needed]
In 1756, Kant also published three papers on the1755 Lisbon earthquake.[26]Kant's theory, which involved shifts in huge caverns filled with hot gases, though inaccurate, was one of the first systematic attempts to explain earthquakes in natural rather than supernatural terms. In 1757, Kant began lecturing on geography, making him one of the first lecturers to explicitly teach geography as its own subject.[27][28]Geography was one of Kant's most popular lecturing topics and, in 1802, a compilation by Friedrich Theodor Rink of Kant's lecturing notes,Physical Geography, was released. After Kant became a professor in 1770, he expanded the topics of his lectures to include lectures onnatural law, ethics, andanthropology, along with other topics.[27]
In theUniversal Natural History, Kant laid out thenebular hypothesis, in which he deduced that theSolar Systemhad formed from a large cloud of gas, anebula. Kant also correctly deduced that theMilky Waywas alarge disk of stars, which he theorized had formed from a much larger spinning gas cloud. He further suggested that other distant "nebulae" might be other galaxies. These postulations opened new horizons for astronomy, for the first time extending it beyond the solar system to galactic and intergalactic realms.[29]
From then on, Kant turned increasingly to philosophical issues, although he continued to write on the sciences throughout his life. In the early 1760s, he produced a series of important works in philosophy.The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures, a work in logic, was published in 1762. Two more works appeared the following year:Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitudes into PhilosophyandThe Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God. By 1764, Kant had become a notable popular author, and wroteObservations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime[30]; he was second toMoses Mendelssohnin a Berlin Academy prize competition with hisInquiry Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morality(often referred to as "The Prize Essay"). In 1766 Kant wrote a critical piece onEmanuel Swedenborg'sDreams of a Spirit-Seer.
In 1770, Kant was appointed Full Professor of Logic and Metaphysics at the University of Königsberg. In defense of this appointment, Kant wrote hisinaugural dissertationOn the Form and Principles of the Sensible and the Intelligible World.[c]This work saw the emergence of several central themes of his mature work, including the distinction between the faculties of intellectual thought and sensible receptivity. To miss this distinction would mean to commit the error ofsubreption, and, as he says in the last chapter of the dissertation, only in avoiding this error does metaphysics flourish.
While it is true that Kant wrote his greatest works relatively late in life, there is a tendency to underestimate the value of his earlier works. Recent Kant scholarship has devoted more attention to these "pre-critical" writings and has recognized a degree of continuity with his mature work.[31]

## Publication of theCritique of Pure Reason
At age 46, Kant was an established scholar and an increasingly influential philosopher, and much was expected of him. In correspondence with his ex-student and friendMarkus Herz, Kant admitted that, in the inaugural dissertation, he had failed to account for the relation between our sensible and intellectual faculties.[32]He needed to explain how we combine what is known as sensory knowledge with the other type of knowledge—that is, reasoned knowledge—these two being related but having very different processes. Kant also creditedDavid Humewith awakening him from a "dogmatic slumber" in which he had unquestioningly accepted the tenets of both religion andnatural philosophy.[33][34]Hume, in his 1739Treatise on Human Nature, had argued that people know the mind only through a subjective, essentially illusory series of perceptions. Ideas such ascausality,morality, andobjectsare not evident in experience, so their reality may be questioned. Kant felt that reason could remove this skepticism, and he set himself to solving these problems. Although fond of company and conversation with others, Kant isolated himself, and resisted friends' attempts to bring him out of his isolation.[d]When Kant emerged from his silence in 1781, the result was theCritique of Pure Reason, printed byJohann Friedrich Hartknoch. Kant countered Hume'sempiricismby claiming that some knowledge exists inherently in the mind, independent of experience.[33]He drew a parallel to theCopernican revolutionin his proposal that worldly objects can be intuiteda priori, and thatintuitionis consequently distinct fromobjective reality. Perhaps the most direct contested matter was Hume's argument against any necessary connection between causal events, which Hume characterized as the "cement of the universe". In theCritique of Pure Reason, Kant argues for what he takes to be thea priorijustification of such necessary connection.[36]
Although now recognized as one of the greatest works in the history of philosophy, theCritiquedisappointed Kant's readers upon its initial publication.[37]The book was long, over 800 pages in the original German edition, and written in a convoluted style. Kant was quite upset with its reception.[38]His former studentJohann Gottfried Herdercriticized it for placing reason as an entity worthy of criticism by itself instead of considering the process of reasoning within the context of language and one's entire personality.[39]Similarly toChristian GarveandJohann Georg Heinrich Feder, he rejected Kant's position that space and time possess a form that can be analyzed. Garve and Feder also faulted theCritiquefor not explaining differences in perception of sensations.[40]Its density made it, as Herder said in a letter toJohann Georg Hamann, a "tough nut to crack", obscured by "all this heavy gossamer".[41]Its reception stood in stark contrast to the praise Kant had received for earlier works, such as hisPrize Essayand shorter works that preceded the firstCritique. Recognizing the need to clarify the original treatise, Kant wrote theProlegomena to any Future Metaphysicsin 1783 as a summary of its main views. Shortly thereafter, Kant's friendJohann Friedrich Schultz(1739–1805), a professor of mathematics, publishedExplanations of Professor Kant's Critique of Pure Reason(Königsberg, 1784), which was a brief but very accurate commentary on Kant'sCritique of Pure Reason.[42]
Kant's reputation gradually rose through the latter portion of the 1780s, sparked by a series of important works: the 1784 essay, "Answer to the Question: What is Enlightenment?"; 1785'sGroundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals(his first work on moral philosophy); andMetaphysical Foundations of Natural Sciencefrom 1786. Kant's fame ultimately arrived from an unexpected source. In 1786,Karl Leonhard Reinholdpublished a series of public letters on Kantian philosophy. In these letters, Reinhold framed Kant's philosophy as a response to the central intellectual controversy of the era: thepantheism controversy.Friedrich Jacobihad accused the recently deceasedGotthold Ephraim Lessing(a distinguished dramatist and philosophical essayist) ofSpinozism. Such a charge, tantamount to an accusation of atheism, was vigorously denied by Lessing's friendMoses Mendelssohn, leading to a bitter public dispute among partisans. The controversy gradually escalated into a debate about the values of the Enlightenment and the value of reason. Reinhold maintained in his letters that Kant'sCritique of Pure Reasoncould settle this dispute by defending the authority and bounds of reason. Reinhold'sletterswere widely read and made Kant the most famous philosopher of his era.[43]

## Later work
Kant published a second edition of theCritique of Pure Reasonin 1787, heavily revising the first parts of the book. Most of his subsequent work focused on other areas of philosophy. He continued to develop his moral philosophy, notably in 1788'sCritique of Practical Reason(known as the secondCritique), and 1797'sMetaphysics of Morals. The 1790Critique of the Power of Judgment(the thirdCritique) applied the Kantian system to aesthetics andteleology. In 1792, Kant's attempt to publish the Second of the four Pieces ofReligion within the Bounds of Bare Reason,[44]in the journalBerlinische Monatsschrift, met with opposition fromthe King'scensorshipcommission, which had been established that same year in the context of theFrench Revolution. Kant then arranged to have all four pieces published as a book, routing it through the philosophy department at the University of Jena to avoid the need for theological censorship. This insubordination earned him a now-famous reprimand from the King. When he nevertheless published a second edition in 1794, the censor was so irate that he arranged for a royal order that required Kant never to publish or even speak publicly about religion. Kant then published his response to the King's reprimand and explained himself in the preface ofThe Conflict of the Faculties(1798).
He also wrote a number of semi-popular essays on history, religion, politics, and other topics. These works were well received by Kant's contemporaries and confirmed his preeminent status in eighteenth-century philosophy. There were several journals devoted solely to defending and criticizing Kantian philosophy. Despite his success, philosophical trends were moving in another direction. Many of Kant's most important disciples and followers (includingKarl Leonhard Reinhold,Jakob Sigismund Beck, andJohann Gottlieb Fichte) transformed the Kantian position. The progressive stages of revision of Kant's teachings marked the emergence ofGerman idealism. In what was one of his final acts expounding a stance on philosophical questions, Kant opposed these developments and publicly denounced Fichte in an open letter in 1799.[45]
In 1800, a student of Kant named Gottlob Benjamin Jäsche (1762–1842) published a manual of logic for teachers calledLogik, which he had prepared at Kant's request. Jäsche prepared theLogikusing a copy of a textbook in logic byGeorg Friedrich MeierentitledExcerpt from the Doctrine of Reason, in which Kant had written copious notes and annotations. TheLogikhas been considered of fundamental importance to Kant's philosophy, and the understanding of it. The great 19th-century logicianCharles Sanders Peirceremarked, in an incomplete review ofThomas Kingsmill Abbott's English translation of the introduction toLogik, that "Kant's whole philosophy turns upon his logic."[46]Also,Robert S. Hartmanand Wolfgang Schwarz wrote in the translators' introduction to their English translation of theLogik, "Its importance lies not only in its significance for theCritique of Pure Reason, the second part of which is a restatement of fundamental tenets of theLogic, but in its position within the whole of Kant's work."[47]

## Death and burial
Kant's health, long poor, worsened. He died in Königsberg on 12 February 1804, utteringEs ist gut("It is good") before his death.[48]His unfinished final work was published asOpus Postumum. Kant always cut a curious figure in his lifetime for his modest, rigorously scheduled habits, which have been referred to as clocklike.Heinrich Heineobserved the magnitude of "his destructive, world-crushing thoughts" and considered him a sort of philosophical "executioner", comparing him toMaximilien Robespierrewith the observation that both men "represented in the highest the type of provincial bourgeois. Nature had destined them to weigh coffee and sugar, but Fate determined that they should weigh other things and placed on the scales of the one a king, on the scales of the other a god."[49]
When his body was transferred to a new burial spot, his skull was measured during the exhumation and found to be larger than the average German male's with a "high and broad" forehead.[50]His forehead has been an object of interest ever since it became well known through his portraits: "In Döbler's portrait and in Kiefer's faithful if expressionistic reproduction of it—as well as in many of the other late eighteenth- and early-nineteenth-century portraits of Kant—the forehead is remarkably large and decidedly retreating."[51]
Kant'smausoleumadjoins the northeast corner ofKönigsberg CathedralinKaliningrad, Russia. The mausoleum was constructed by the architectFriedrich Lahrsand was finished in 1924, in time for the bicentenary of Kant's birth. Originally, Kant was buried inside the cathedral, but in 1880 his remains were moved to aneo-Gothicchapel adjoining the northeast corner of the cathedral. Over the years, the chapel became dilapidated and was demolished to make way for the mausoleum, which was built on the same location. The tomb and its mausoleum are among the few artifacts of German times preserved by theSovietsafter they captured the city.[52]
Into the 21st century, many newlyweds bring flowers to the mausoleum. Artifacts previously owned by Kant, known asKantiana, were included in theKönigsberg City Museum; however, the museum was destroyed duringWorld War II. A replica of the statue of Kant that in German times stood in front of the mainUniversity of Königsbergbuilding was donated by a German entity in the early 1990s and placed in the same grounds. Afterthe expulsionof Königsberg's German population at the end of World War II, the University of Königsberg where Kant taught was replaced by the Russian-language Kaliningrad State University, which appropriated the campus and surviving buildings. In 2005, the university was renamed Immanuel Kant State University of Russia.[53]The name change, which was considered a politically-charged issue due to the residents having mixed feelings about its German past,[54]was announced at a ceremony attended by Russian presidentVladimir Putinand German chancellorGerhard Schröder,[55][56][57]and the university formed a Kant Society, dedicated to the study ofKantianism. In 2010, the university was again renamed toImmanuel Kant Baltic Federal University.[58]

## Philosophy
Like many of his contemporaries, Kant was greatly impressed with the scientific advances made bySir Isaac Newtonand others. This new evidence of the power of human reason called into question for many the traditional authority of politics and religion. In particular, the modern mechanistic view of the world called into question the very possibility of morality; for, if there is no agency, there cannot be any responsibility.[59][60]
The aim of Kant's critical project is to secure human autonomy, the basis of religion and morality, from this threat of mechanism—and to do so in a way that preserves the advances of modern science.[61]In theCritique of Pure Reason, Kant summarizes his philosophical concerns in the following three questions:
TheCritique of Pure Reasonfocuses upon the first question and opens a conceptual space for an answer to the second question. It argues that even though we cannot strictlyknowthat we are free, we can—and for practical purposes, must—thinkof ourselves as free. In Kant's own words, "I had to deny knowledge in order to make room for faith."[63]Kant's moral philosophy is further developed in theGroundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, theMetaphysics of Morals, and theCritique of Practical Reason.[64][65]
TheCritique of the Power of Judgmentargues we may rationally hope for the harmonious unity of the theoretical and practical domains treated in the first twoCritiqueson the basis of our affective experience of natural beauty and, more generally, theteleologicalorganization of the natural world.[66]InReligion within the Bounds of Mere Reason, Kant endeavors to complete his answer to this third question by arguing for a rationalist form of religion grounded on our practical (i.e., moral) lives.[67]
These works all place the active, rational humansubjectat the center of the cognitive and moral worlds. In brief, Kant argues that theminditself necessarily makes a constitutive contribution toknowledge, that this contribution is transcendental rather than psychological, and that to act autonomously is to act according to rational moral principles.[68]

## Kant's critical project
Kant's 1781 (revised 1787)Critique of Pure Reasonhas often been cited as the most significant volume of metaphysics andepistemologyin modern philosophy.[69]In the firstCritique, and in later works as well, Kant frames the "general" and "real problem of pure reason" in terms of the following question: "How are synthetic judgmentsa prioripossible?"[70][71]To understand this claim, it is necessary to define some terms. First, Kant makes a distinction between two sources of knowledge:
Second, he makes a distinction between two kinds of judgements:
All analytic judgements area priorisince experience is not necessary for analyzing the content of a concept we already possess.[74]By contrast, a synthetic judgement is one whose predicate concept contains something not in the subject concept. The most obvious examples of synthetic judgement are judgments grounded in empirical observations.[75]The two kinds of knowledge and two kinds of judgment yield a fourfold table:
Kant believed that previous philosophers had neglected synthetic a priori judgments, and had paid attention only to analytica prioriand synthetica posteriorijudgments.David Hume, for example, believed that all knoweldge is either of "relations of ideas" (which are analytica priori) or "matters of fact" (which are synthetica posteriori).[76]Hume's taxonomy excludes the synthetica priori. But by establishing the synthetica priorias a third kind of judgment, Kant believes we can push back against Hume's skepticism about such matters as causation and metaphysical knowledge more generally. This is because, unlike merelya posteriorijudgments,a priorijudgments have "true or strict ... universality" and includes a claim of "necessity".[77][75]And, unlike merely analytic claims, synthetic judgements extend our knowledge beyond the subject concept. This means that showing how synthetica priorijudgments are possible amounts to showing how substantive knowledge about necessary features of the world is possible.
Kant himself regards it as uncontroversial that we do have synthetica prioriknowledge—especially in mathematics. Consider the proposition '7 + 5 = 12'. Kant claims that the concept of '12' is not contained in the concepts of '5', '7', and the addition operation.[78]Yet, although he considers the possibility of such knowledge to be obvious, Kant nevertheless assumes the burden of showing how such synthetica prioriknowledge in mathematics and the natural sciences is possible, and attacks, in the Transcendental Dialectic, the possibility of synthetica prioriknowledge of traditional metaphysics. It is the twofold aim of theCritiquebothto proveandto explainthe possibility of this knowledge.[79]Kant says "There are two stems of human cognition, which may perhaps arise from a common but to us unknown root, namely sensibility and understanding, through the first of which objects aregivento us, but through the second of which they arethought."[80]
Kant's term for the object of sensibility is 'intuition', and his term for the object of the understanding is 'concept'. In general terms, the former is a non-discursive representation of aparticularobject, and the latter is a discursive (or mediate) representation of ageneral typeof object.[81]The conditions of possible experience require both intuitions and concepts, that is, the affection of the receptive sensibility and the actively synthesizing power of the understanding.[82][e]Thus the statement: "Thoughts without content are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind."[84]Kant's basic strategy in the first part ofCritique of Pure Reasonwill be to argue that some intuitions and concepts are pure—that is, are contributed entirely by the mind, independent of anything empirical. Knowledge generated on this basis, under certain conditions, can be synthetica priori. This insight is known as Kant's "Copernican revolution", because, just as Copernicus advanced astronomy by way of a radical shift in perspective, so Kant here claims do the same for metaphysics.[85][86]The second part of theCritiqueis the explicitlycriticalpart. In the "Transcendental Dialectic", Kant argues that many of the claims of traditional rationalist metaphysics violate the criteria he claims to establish in the first, "constructive" part of his book and inevitably to contradictions.[87][88]As Kant observes, however, "human reason, without being moved by the mere vanity of knowing it all, inexorably pushes on, driven by its own need to such questions that cannot be answered by any experiential use of reason".[89]It is the project of theCritiqueto establish how far reason may legitimately so proceed.[90]

## Doctrine of transcendental idealism
In the section of theCritiqueentitled "The Transcendental Aesthetic", Kant argues for the doctrine oftranscendental idealism. The doctrine is "transcendental" because it explains a necessary condition for the possibility of experience and is a form of "idealism" because those conditions are dependent on features of the mind. The details of the correct interpretation of transcendental idealism are controversial, but there is broad agreement on two basic theses.[91]First, space and time are notthings in themselvesbut are mere forms of intuition (space is the form ofouterintuition, and time is the form ofinnerintuition). Second, we have knowledge only ofappearancesand not of things in themselves. The second thesis, Kant believes, follows from the first: because oura prioriforms of intuition are necessary conditions of the possibility of experience, anything that fall outside what our sensible faculty can receive are unknowable.[92][93]Nevertheless, although Kant says that space and time are "transcendentally ideal"—thepure formsof human sensibility, rather than part of nature or reality as it is in itself—he also claims that they are "empirically real", by which he means "that 'everything that can come before us externally as an object' is in both space and time, and that our internal intuitions of ourselves are in time".[94][92]However Kant's doctrine is interpreted, he wished to distinguish his position from thesubjective idealismofGeorge Berkeley.[95]
Paul Guyer, although critical of many of Kant's arguments in this section, writes of the Transcendental Aesthetic that it "not only lays the first stone in Kant's constructive theory of knowledge; it also lays the foundation for both his critique and his reconstruction of traditional metaphysics. It argues that all genuine knowledge requires a sensory component, and thus that metaphysical claims that transcend the possibility of sensory confirmation can never amount to knowledge."[96]

## Interpretive disagreements
One interpretation, known as the "two-aspect" (or "one-world") interpretation, takes transcendental idealism to be, most fundamentally, anepistemologicalthesis. On this reading of Kant, popularized especially byHenry E. Allison, thething-in-itselfand the phenomenal appearance are the same object, and transcendental idealism is a thesis about what is necessary for finite, discursive minds toconsiderobjects as they are given to us by sensibility.[97]Some commentators,[98][99]while agreeing that there is just one set of objects, take transcendental idealism to be a thesis about thepropertiesof those objects, some of which we have access to, and others of which are unknowable to us.
The other prominent line of interpretation is the "two-world" view (sometimes associated with "phenomenalist"[100]interpretations). On this view, appearances are not the same things as things in themselves, and transcendental idealism is not merely a thesis about what is necessary for us to consider objects that are transcendentally independent of us. Some "two-world" advocates take Kant to be claiming that appearances are identical to our representations of them,[101][102]while others take him to be merely claiming that appearances are partly grounded in things in themselves without being identical to them.[103]

## Kant's theory of judgment
Following the "Transcendental Analytic" is the "Transcendental Logic". Whereas the former was concerned with the contributions of the sensibility, the latter is concerned, first, with the contributions of the understanding ("Transcendental Analytic") and, second, with the faculty ofreasonas the source of both metaphysical errors and genuine regulatory principles ("Transcendental Dialectic"). The "Transcendental Analytic" is further divided into two sections. The first, "Analytic of Concepts", is concerned with establishing the universality and necessity of thepureconcepts of the understanding (i.e., the categories). This section contains Kant's famous "transcendental deduction". The second, "Analytic of Principles", is concerned with the application of those pure concepts inempiricaljudgments. This second section is longer than the first and is further divided into many sub-sections.[104]

## Transcendental deduction of the categories of the understanding
The "Analytic of Concepts" argues for the universal and necessary validity of the pure concepts of the understanding, or the categories, for instance, the concepts of substance and causation. These twelve basic categories define what it is to be athing in general—that is, they articulate the necessary conditions according to which something is a possible object of experience. These, in conjunction with thea prioriforms of intuition, are the basis of all synthetica prioricognition. According toPaul GuyerandAllen W. Wood, "Kant's idea is that just as there are certain essential features of all judgments, so there must be certain corresponding ways in which we form the concepts of objects so that judgments may be about objects."[105]
Kant provides two central lines of argumentation in support of his claims about the categories. The first, known as the "metaphysical deduction", proceeds analytically from a table of the Aristotelian logical functions of judgment. As Kant was aware, this assumes precisely what the skeptic rejects, namely, the existence of synthetica prioricognition. For this reason, Kant also supplies a synthetic argument that does not depend upon the assumption in dispute.[106]
This argument, provided under the heading "Transcendental Deduction of the Pure Concepts of the Understanding", is widely considered to be both the most important and the most difficult of Kant's arguments in theCritique. Kant himself said that it is the one that cost him the most labor.[107]Frustrated by its confused reception in the first edition of his book, he rewrote it entirely for the second edition.[108][109]
The "Transcendental Deduction" gives Kant's argument that these pure concepts apply universally and necessarily to the objects that are given in experience. According to Guyer and Wood, "He centers his argument on the premise that our experience can be ascribed to a single identical subject, via what he calls the 'transcendental unity of apperception,' only if the elements of experience given in intuition are synthetically combined so as to present us with objects that are thought through the categories."[110]
Kant's principle of apperception is that "The I think must be able to accompany all my representations; for otherwise something would be represented in me that could not be thought at all, which is as much as to say that the representation would either be impossible or else at least would be nothing for me."[111]Thenecessarypossibility of the self-ascription of the representations of self-consciousness, identical to itself through time, is ana prioriconceptual truth that cannot be based on experience.[112]This is only a bare sketch of one of the arguments that Kant presents.

## Principles of pure understanding
Kant's deduction of the categories in the "Analytic of Concepts", if successful, demonstrates its claims about the categories only in an abstract way. The task of the "Analytic of Principles" is to show boththatthey must universally apply to objects given in actual experience (i.e., manifolds of intuition) andhowit is they do so.[113]In the first book of this section on the "schematism", Kant connects each of the purely logical categories of the understanding to the temporality of intuition to show that, although non-empirical, they do have purchase upon the objects of experience. The second book continues this line of argument in four chapters, each associated with one of the category groupings. In some cases, it adds a connection to the spatial dimension of intuition to the categories it analyzes.[114]The fourth chapter of this section, "The Analogies of Experience", marks a shift from "mathematical" to "dynamical" principles, that is, to those that deal with relations among objects. Some commentators consider this the most significant section of theCritique.[115]The analogies are three in number:
The fourth section of this chapter, which is not an analogy, deals with the empirical use of the modal categories. That was the end of the chapter in the A edition of theCritique. The B edition includes one more short section, "The Refutation of Idealism". In this section, by analysis of the concept of self-consciousness, Kant argues that his transcendental idealism is a "critical" or "formal" idealism that does not deny the existence of reality apart from our subjective representations.[120]The final chapter of "The Analytic of Principles" distinguishesphenomena, of which we can have genuine knowledge, fromnoumena, a term which refers to objects of pure thought that we cannot know, but to which we may still refer "in a negative sense".[121]An Appendix to the section further develops Kant's criticism of Leibnizian-Wolffian rationalism by arguing that its "dogmatic" metaphysics confuses the "mere features of concepts through which we think things ... [with] features of the objects themselves". Against this, Kant reasserts his own insistence upon the necessity of a sensible component in all genuine knowledge.[122]

## Critique of metaphysics
The second of the two Divisions of "The Transcendental Logic", "The Transcendental Dialectic", contains the "negative" portion of Kant'sCritique, which builds upon the "positive" arguments of the preceding "Transcendental Analytic" to expose the limits of metaphysical speculation. In particular, it is concerned to demonstrate as spurious the efforts of reason to arrive at knowledge independent of sensibility. This endeavor, Kant argues, is doomed to failure, which he claims to demonstrate by showing that reason, unbounded by sense, is always capable of generating opposing or otherwise incompatible conclusions. Like "the light dove, in free flight cutting through the air, the resistance of which it feels", reason "could get the idea that it could do even better in airless space".[123]Against this, Kant claims that, absent epistemic friction, there can be no knowledge. Nevertheless, Kant's critique is not entirely destructive. He presents the speculative excesses of traditional metaphysics as inherent in our very capacity of reason. Moreover, he argues that its products are not without some (carefully qualified)regulativevalue.[124]

## On the concepts of pure reason
Kant calls the basic concepts of metaphysics "ideas". They are different from the concepts of understanding in that they are not limited by the critical stricture limiting knowledge to the conditions of possible experience and its objects. "Transcendental illusion" is Kant's term for the tendency of reason to produce such ideas.[125]Although reason has a "logical use" of simply drawing inferences from principles, in "The Transcendental Dialectic", Kant is concerned with its purportedly "real use" to arrive at conclusions by way of unchecked regressive syllogistic ratiocination.[126]The three categories ofrelation, pursued without regard to the limits of possible experience, yield the three central ideas of traditional metaphysics:
Although Kant denies that these ideas can be objects of genuine cognition, he argues that they are the result of reason's inherent drive to unify cognition into a systematic whole.[125]Leibnizian-Wolffian metaphysics was divided into four parts: ontology, psychology, cosmology, and theology. Kant replaces the first with the positive results of the first part of theCritique. He proposes to replace the following three with his later doctrines of anthropology, the metaphysical foundations of natural science, and the critical postulation of human freedom and morality.[127]

## Dialectical inferences of pure reason
In the second of the two Books of "The Transcendental Dialectic", Kant undertakes to demonstrate the contradictory nature of unbounded reason. He does this by developing contradictions in each of the three metaphysical disciplines that he contends are in fact pseudosciences. This section of theCritiqueis long and Kant's arguments are extremely detailed. In this context, it not possible to do much more than enumerate the topics of discussion. The first chapter addresses what Kant terms theparalogisms—i.e., false inferences—that pure reason makes in the metaphysical discipline of rational psychology. He argues that one cannot take the mere thought of "I" in the proposition "I think" as the proper cognition of "I" as an object. In this way, he claims to debunk various metaphysical theses about the substantiality, unity, and self-identity of the soul.[128]The second chapter, which is the longest, takes up the topic Kant calls theantinomies of pure reason—that is, the contradictions of reason with itself—in the metaphysical discipline of rational cosmology. Originally, Kant had thought that all transcendental illusion could be analyzed inantinomic terms.[129]He presents four cases in which he claims reason is able to prove opposing theses with equal plausibility:
Kant further argues in each case that his doctrine of transcendental idealism is able to resolve the antinomy.[130]The third chapter examines fallacious arguments about God in rational theology under the heading of the "Ideal of Pure Reason". (Whereas anideais a pure concept generated by reason, anidealis the concept of an idea as anindividual thing.[132]) Here Kant addresses and claims to refute three traditional arguments for the existence of God: theontological argument, thecosmological argument, and thephysio-theological argument(i.e., the argument from design).[133]The results of the transcendental dialectic so far appear to be entirely negative. In an Appendix to this section, Kant rejects such a conclusion. The ideas of pure reason, he argues, have an importantregulatoryfunction in directing and organizing our theoretical and practical inquiry. Kant's later works elaborate upon this function at length and in detail.[134]

## Moral thought
Kant developed his ethics, or moral philosophy, in three works:Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals(1785),Critique of Practical Reason(1788), andMetaphysics of Morals(1797). With regard tomorality, Kant argued that the source of thegoodlies not in anything outside thehumansubject, either innatureor given byGod, but rather is only the good will itself. A good will is one that acts from duty in accordance with the universal moral law that the autonomous human being freely gives itself. This law obliges one to treat humanity—understood as rational agency, and represented through oneself as well as others—as anend in itselfrather than (merely) asmeansto other ends the individual might hold. Kant is known for his theory that allmoral obligationis grounded in what he calls the "categorical imperative", which is derived from the concept ofduty. He argues that the moral law is a principle ofreasonitself, not based on contingent facts about the world, such as what would make us happy; to act on the moral law has no other motive than "worthiness to be happy".[135]

## Idea of freedom
In theCritique of Pure Reason, Kant distinguishes between the transcendental idea of freedom, which as a psychological concept is "mainly empirical" and refers to "whether a faculty of beginning a series of successive things or states from itself is to be assumed",[136]and the practical concept of freedom as the independence of our will from the "coercion" or "necessitation through sensuous impulses". Kant finds it a source of difficulty that the practical idea of freedom is founded on the transcendental idea of freedom,[137]but for the sake of practical interests uses the practical meaning, taking "no account of ... its transcendental meaning", which he feels was properly "disposed of" in the Third Antinomy, and as an element in the question of the freedom of the will is for philosophy "a real stumbling block" that has embarrassed speculative reason.[136]
Kant callspractical"everything that is possible through freedom"; he calls the pure practical laws that are never given through sensuous conditions, but are held analogously with the universal law of causality, moral laws. Reason can give us only the "pragmatic laws of free action through the senses", but pure practical laws given by reasona prioridictate "what is to be done".[136][138]Kant's categories of freedom function primarily as conditions for the possibility for actions (i) to be free, (ii) to be understood as free, and (iii) to be morally evaluated. For Kant, although actions as theoretical objects are constituted by means of the theoretical categories, actions as practical objects (objects of practical use of reason, and which can be good or bad) are constituted by means of the categories of freedom. Only in this way can actions, as phenomena, be a consequence of freedom, and be understood and evaluated as such.[139]

## Categorical imperative
Kant makes a distinction between categorical andhypothetical imperatives. Ahypotheticalimperative is one that must be obeyed to satisfy contingent desires. Acategoricalimperative bindsrational agentsregardless of their desires: for example, all rational agents have a duty to respect other rational agents as individual ends in themselves, regardless of circumstances, even though it is sometimes in one's selfish interest to not do so. These imperatives are morally binding because of the categorical form of their maxims, rather than contingent facts about an agent.[140]Unlike hypothetical imperatives, which bind us insofar as we are part of a group or society which we owe duties to, we cannot opt out of the categorical imperative, because we cannot opt out of being rational agents. We owe a duty to rationality by virtue of being rational agents; therefore, rational moral principles apply to all rational agents at all times.[141]Stated in other terms, with all forms of instrumental rationality excluded from morality, "the moral law itself, Kant holds, can only be the form of lawfulness itself, because nothing else is left once all content has been rejected".[142]
Kant provides three formulations for the categorical imperative. He claims that these are necessarily equivalent, as all being expressions of the pure universality of the moral law as such;[143]many scholars are not convinced.[144]The formulas are as follows:
Kant definesmaximas a "subjective principle of volition", which is distinguished from an "objective principle or 'practical law.'" While "the latter is valid for every rational being and is a 'principle according to which they ought to act[,]' a maxim 'contains the practical rule which reason determines in accordance with the conditions of the subject (often their ignorance or inclinations) and is thus the principle according to which the subject does act.'"[151]
Maxims fail to qualify as practical laws if they produce a contradiction in conception or a contradiction in the will when universalized. A contradiction in conception happens when, if a maxim were to be universalized, it ceases to make sense, because the "maxim would necessarily destroy itself as soon as it was made a universal law".[152]For example, if the maxim 'It is permissible to break promises' was universalized, no one would trust any promises made, so the idea of a promise would become meaningless; the maxim would beself-contradictorybecause, when it is universalized, promises cease to be meaningful. The maxim is not moral because it is logically impossible to universalize—that is, we could not conceive of a world where this maxim was universalized.[153]A maxim can also be immoral if it creates a contradiction in the will when universalized. This does not mean a logical contradiction, but that universalizing the maxim leads to a state of affairs that norationalbeing would desire.

## "The Doctrine of Virtue"
As Kant explains in the 1785Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Moralsand as its title directly indicates, that text is "nothing more than the search for and establishment of thesupreme principle of morality".[154]His promisedMetaphysics of Moralswas much delayed and did not appear until its two parts, "The Doctrine of Right" and "The Doctrine of Virtue", were published separately in 1797 and 1798.[155]The first deals with political philosophy, the second with ethics. "The Doctrine of Virtue" provides "a very different account of ordinary moral reasoning" than the one suggested by theGroundwork.[156]It is concerned withduties of virtueor "ends that are at the same time duties".[157]It is here, in the domain of ethics, that the greatest innovation byThe Metaphysics of Moralsis to be found. According to Kant's account, "ordinary moral reasoning is fundamentally teleological—it is reasoning about what ends we are constrained by morality to pursue, and the priorities among these ends we are required to observe".[158]
There are two sorts of ends that it is our duty to have: our own perfection and the happiness of others (MS6:385). "Perfection" includes both our natural perfection (the development of our talents, skills, and capacities of understanding) and moral perfection (our virtuous disposition) (MS6:387). A person's "happiness" is the greatest rational whole of the ends the person set for the sake of her own satisfaction (MS6:387–388).[159]
Kant's elaboration of this teleological doctrine offers up a moral theory very different from the one typically attributed to him on the basis of his foundational works alone.

## Political philosophy
InTowards Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Project, Kant listed several conditions that he thought necessary for ending wars and creating a lasting peace. They included a world of constitutional republics.[160]Hisclassical republicantheory was extended in the "Doctrine of Right", the first part of theMetaphysics of Morals(1797).[161]Kant believed thatuniversal historyleads to the ultimate world of republican states at peace, but his theory was not pragmatic. The process was described inPerpetual Peaceas natural rather than rational:
What affords thisguarantee(surety) is nothing less than the great artistnature(natura daedala rerum) from whose mechanical course purposiveness shines forth visibly, letting concord arise by means of the discord between human beings even against their will; and for this reason nature, regarded as necessitation by a cause the laws of whose operation are unknown to us, is calledfate, but if we consider its purposiveness in the course of the world as the profound wisdom of a higher cause directed to the objective final end of the human race and predetermining this course of the world, it is calledprovidence.[162]
Kant's political thought can be summarized as republican government and international organization: "In more characteristically Kantian terms, it is doctrine of the state based upon the law (Rechtsstaat) and of eternal peace. Indeed, in each of these formulations, both terms express the same idea: that of legal constitution or of 'peace through law.'"[163]"Kant's political philosophy, being essentially a legal doctrine, rejects by definition the opposition between moral education and the play of passions as alternate foundations for social life. The state is defined as the union of men under law. The state rightly so called is constituted by laws which are necessary a priori because they flow from the very concept of law. A regime can be judged by no other criteria nor be assigned any other functions, than those proper to the lawful order as such."[164]
Kant opposed "democracy", which at his time meantdirect democracy, believing that majority rule posed a threat to individual liberty. He stated that "democracyin the strict sense of the word is necessarily adespotismbecause it establishes an executive power in which all decide for and, if need be, against one (who thus does not agree), so that all, who are nevertheless not all, decide; and this is a contradiction of the general will with itself and with freedom."[165]
As with most writers at the time, Kant distinguished three forms of government—namely, democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy—withmixed governmentas the most ideal form of it.[166]He believed inrepublicanideals and forms of governance, andrule of lawbrought on by them.[167]Although Kant published this as a "popular piece",Mary J. Gregorpoints out that two years later, inThe Metaphysics of Morals, Kant claims to demonstratesystematicallythat "establishing universal and lasting peace constitutes not merely a part of the doctrine of right, but rather the entire final end of the doctrine of right within the limits of mere reason".[168][169]
The Doctrine of Right, published in 1797, contains Kant's most mature and systematic contribution to political philosophy. It addresses duties according to law, which are "concerned only with protecting the external freedom of individuals" and indifferent to incentives. Although there is a moral duty "to limit ourselves to actions that are right, that duty is not part of [right] itself".[156]Its basic political idea is that "each person's entitlement to be his or her own master is only consistent with the entitlements of others if public legal institutions are in place".[170]He formulates the universal principle of right as:
Any action isrightif it can coexist with everyone's freedom in accordance with a universal law, or if on its maxim the freedom of choice of each can coexist with everyone's freedom in accordance with a universal law. (MS6:230).[156]

## Religious writings
Starting in the 20th century, commentators tended to see Kant as having a strained relationship with religion, although in the nineteenth century this had not been the prevalent view.Karl Leonhard Reinhold, whose letters helped make Kant famous, wrote: "I believe that I may infer without reservation that the interest of religion, and of Christianity in particular, accords completely with the result of the Critique of Reason."[171]According toJohann Friedrich Schultz, who wrote one of the first commentaries on Kant: "And does not this system itself cohere most splendidly with the Christian religion? Do not the divinity and beneficence of the latter become all the more evident?"[172]The reason for these views was Kant's moral theology and the widespread belief that his philosophy was the great antithesis toSpinozism, which was widely seen as a form of sophisticated pantheism or even atheism. As Kant's philosophy disregarded the possibility of arguing for God through pure reason alone, for the same reasons it also disregarded the possibility of arguing against God through pure reason alone.
Kant directs his strongest criticisms of the organization and practices of religious organizations at those that encourage what he sees as a religion of counterfeit service to God.[173]Among the major targets of his criticism are external ritual, superstition, and a hierarchical church order. He sees these as efforts to make oneself pleasing to God in ways other than conscientious adherence to the principle of moral rightness in choosing and acting upon one's maxims. Kant's criticisms on these matters, along with his rejection of certain theoretical proofs for the existence of God that were grounded in pure reason (particularly theontological argument) and his philosophical commentary on some Christian doctrines, have resulted in interpretations that see Kant as hostile to religion in general and to Christianity in particular.[174]Other interpreters, nevertheless, consider that Kant was trying to mark off defensible from indefensible Christian belief.[175]
Regarding Kant's conception of religion, some critics have argued that he was sympathetic to deism.[176]Other critics have argued that Kant's moral conception moves from deism to theism (as moral theism), for example Allen W. Wood,[177]as well asMerold Westphal.[178]As for Kant's bookReligion within the Bounds of Mere Reason, it was emphasized that Kant reduced religiosity to rationality, religion to morality, and Christianity to ethics;[179]however, many interpreters, including Wood,[180]alongside Lawrence Pasternack,[181]now agree withStephen Palmquist's claim that a better way of reading Kant'sReligionis to see him as raising morality to the status of religion.[182]

## Aesthetics
Kant discusses the subjective nature of aesthetic qualities and experiences inObservations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime(1764). Kant's contribution toaesthetic theoryis developed in theCritique of the Power of Judgment(1790), where he investigates the possibility and logical status of "judgments of taste". In the "Critique of Aesthetic Judgment", the first major division of theCritique of the Power of Judgment, Kant used the term "aesthetic" in a manner that resembles its modern sense.[183]In theCritique of Pure Reason, to note essential differences between judgments of taste, moral judgments, and scientific judgments, Kant abandoned the term "aesthetic" as "designating the critique of taste", noting that judgments of taste could never be "directed" by "lawsa priori".[184]AfterAlexander Gottlieb Baumgarten, who wroteAesthetica(1750–58),[f]Kant was one of the first philosophers to develop and integrate aesthetic theory into a unified and comprehensive philosophical system, utilizing ideas that played an integral role throughout his philosophy.[185]In the chapter "Analytic of the Beautiful" in theCritique of the Power of Judgment, Kant states that beauty is not a property of an artwork or natural phenomenon, but is instead consciousness of the pleasure that attends the 'free play' of the imagination and the understanding. Even though it appears that we are using reason to decide what is beautiful, the judgment is not a cognitive judgment,[g]"and is consequently not logical, but aesthetical".[186]
A pure judgement of taste is subjective since it refers to the emotional response of the subject and is based upon nothing but esteem for an object itself: it is a disinterested pleasure, and we feel that pure judgements of taste (i.e., judgements of beauty), lay claim to universal validity.[187]This universal validity is not derived from a determinate concept of beauty but fromcommon sense.[188]Kant also believed that a judgment of taste shares characteristics with a moral judgment: both are disinterested, and we hold them to be universal.[189][190]In the chapter "Analytic of the Sublime," Kant identifies thesublimeas an aesthetic quality that, like beauty, is subjective, but unlike beauty, it refers to an indeterminate relationship between the faculties of the imagination and reason. It also shares the character of moral judgments in its engagement with reason.[191]The feeling of the sublime, divided into two distinct modes (the mathematical and the dynamical sublime),[192]describes two subjective moments that concern the relationship of the faculty of the imagination to reason. Some commentators argue that Kant's critical philosophy contains a third kind of the sublime, the moral sublime, which is the aesthetic response to the moral law or a representation, and a development of the "noble" sublime in Kant's theory of 1764.[193]
The mathematical sublime results from the failure of the imagination to comprehend natural objects that appear boundless and formless, or appear "absolutely great".[194]This imaginative failure is then recuperated through the pleasure taken in reason's assertion of the concept of infinity. In this move the faculty of reason proves itself superior to our fallible sensible self.[195]In the dynamical sublime, there is the sense of annihilation of the sensible self as the imagination tries to comprehend a vast might. This power of nature threatens us but through the resistance of reason to such sensible annihilation, the subject feels a pleasure and a sense of the human moral vocation. This appreciation of moral feeling through exposure to thesublimehelps to develop moral character.[196]Kant developed a theory ofhumor,[197]which has been interpreted as an "incongruity" theory. He illustrated his theory of humor by telling three narrative jokes in theCritique of Judgment. He thought that the physiological impact of humor is akin to that of music.[198]
Kant developed a distinction between an object of art as a material value subject to the conventions of society and the transcendental condition of the judgment of taste as a "refined" value in hisIdea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Aim(1784). In the Fourth and Fifth Theses of that work he identified all art as the "fruits of unsociableness" due to men's "antagonism in society"[199]and, in the Seventh Thesis, asserted that while such material property is indicative of a civilized state, only the ideal of morality and the universalization of refined value through the improvement of the mind "belongs to culture".[200]

## Anthropology
Kant lectured onanthropology, the study of human nature, for twenty-three years.[201]HisAnthropology from a Pragmatic Point of Viewwas published in 1798. Transcripts of Kant's lectures on anthropology were published for the first time in 1997 in German.[202]Kant was among the first people of his time to introduce anthropology as an intellectual area of study, long before the field gained popularity, and his texts are considered to have advanced the field. His point of view was to influence the works of later philosophers such asMartin HeideggerandPaul Ricœur.[203]
Kant was the first to suggest using a dimensionality approach to human diversity. He analyzed the nature of theHippocrates-Galenfour temperamentsand plotted in two dimensions "what belongs to a human being's faculty of desire":
"his natural aptitude or natural predisposition" and "his temperament or sensibility".[204]Cholerics were described as emotional and energetic, phlegmatics as balanced and weak, sanguines as balanced and energetic, and melancholics as emotional and weak. These two dimensions reappeared in all subsequent models of temperament and personality traits. Kant viewed anthropology in two broad categories: (1) the physiological approach, which he referred to as "what nature makes of the human being"; and (2) the pragmatic approach, which explores the things that a human "can and should make of himself".[205]

## Views on race
Kant's theory of race and his prejudicial beliefs are among the most contentious areas of recent Kant scholarship.[206][207][208]While few, if any, dispute the overt racism and chauvinism present in his work, a more contested question is the degree to which it degrades or invalidates his other contributions. His most severe critics assert that Kant intentionally manipulated science to support chattel slavery and discrimination.[209][210][206]Others acknowledge that he lived in an era of immature science, with many erroneous beliefs, some racist, all appearing decades before evolution, molecular genetics, and other sciences that today are taken for granted.[206][207][211][212]Kant was one of the most notable Enlightenment thinkers to defendracism. The philosopherCharles W. Millsis unequivocal: "Kant is also seen as one of the central figures in the birth of modern 'scientific' racism. Whereas other contributors to early racial thought like Carolus Linnaeus and Johann Friedrich Blumenbach had offered only 'empirical' (scare-quotes necessary!) observation, Kant produced a full-blowntheoryof race."[213]
Examples of his racist remarks can be found inObservations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime,where he dismisses the opinion of a "Negro carpenter" by saying:[214]
There might be something here worth considering, except for the fact thatthis scoundrel was completely black from head to foot, a distinct proof that what he said was stupid.
He also uses statements fromHumeto opine racist views:[214]
The Negroes of Africahave by nature no feeling that rises above the ridiculous. Mr. Hume challenges anyone to adduce a single example where a Negro has demonstrated talents, and asserts that among the hundreds of thousands of blacks who have been transported elsewhere from their countries, although very many of them have been set free, neverthelessnot a single one has ever been found who has accomplished something great in art or science or shown any other praiseworthy quality, while among the whites there are always those who rise up from the lowest rabble and through extraordinary gifts earn respect in the world. So essential is the difference between these two human kinds, and it seems to be just as great with regard to the capacities of mind as it is with respect to color.The religion of fetishes which is widespread among them is perhaps a sort of idolatry, which sinks so deeply into the ridiculous as ever seems to be possible for human nature. A bird’s feather, a cow’s horn, a shell, or any other common thing, as soon as it is consecrated with some words, is an object of veneration and of invocation in swearing oaths.The blacks are very vain, but in the Negro’s way, and so talkative that they must be driven apart from each other by blows.
He mocks the customs of non-European lands such as China, India, Japan and Arabia. One such example:[214]
In Peking, when there is an eclipse of the sun or moon, they still carry on the ceremony of driving away with a great noise the dragon that would devour these heavenly bodies, andthey preserve a miserable custom from the most ancient times of ignorance, even though one is now better informed.
In hisOn the Different Races of Man, he uses a lot of scientific racism to describe different races. One such example:[215]
The profusion of iron particles which are otherwise found in the blood of every human being, and, in this case, are precipitated in the net-shaped substance through the evaporation of the phosphoric acid (which explains why all Negroes stink), is the cause of the blackness that shines through the epidermis. The heavy iron content in the blood also seems to be necessary in order to prevent the enervation of all the parts of the body. The oily skin, which weakens the nourishing mucus necessary for the growth of hair, hardly even allows for the production of the wool that covers the head.Besides all this, humid warmth generally promotes the strong growth of animals.In short, all of these factors account for the origin of the Negro,who is well-suited to his climate, namely, strong, fleshy, and agile.However, because he is so amply supplied by his motherland,he is also lazy, indolent, and dawdling.
Justifying the superiority of whites, he writes in the same essay:[215]
Among whites, however, these acids and the volatile alkaline content are not reflected at all because the iron in the bodily juices has been dissolved, thereby demonstrating both theperfect mixing of juices and the strength of this human stock in comparison to others.
Using thefour temperamentsof ancient Greece, Kant proposed a hierarchy of racial categories including white Europeans, black Africans, and red Native Americans.[216]Although he was a proponent ofscientific racismfor much of his career, Kant's views on race changed significantly in the last decade of his life, and he ultimately rejected EuropeancolonialisminPerpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch(1795), and possibly dropped his views on racial hierarchies too (albeit never explicitly repudiating them).[208][217][216][h]Kant was an opponent ofmiscegenation, believing that whites would be "degraded" and that "fusing of races" is undesirable, for "not every race adopts the morals and customs of the Europeans". He states that "instead of assimilation, which was intended by the melting together of the various races, nature has here made a law of just the opposite".[220]Kant was also an anti-Semite, believing that Jews were incapable of transcending material forces, which a moral order required. In this way, Jews are presented as the opposite of autonomous, rational Christians, and therefore incapable of being incorporated into an ethical Christian society. In his "Anthropology", Kant called the Jews "a nation of cheaters" and portrayed them as "a group that has followed not the path of transcendental freedom but that of enslavement to the material world".[221]
Mills wrote that Kant has been "sanitized for public consumption"; his racist works conveniently ignored.[222]Robert Bernasconistated that Kant "supplied the first scientific definition of race".Emmanuel Chukwudi Ezeis credited with bringing Kant's contributions to racism to light in the 1990s among Western philosophers, who he believed often glossed over this part of his life and works.[223]Pauline Kleingeld argues that, while Kant "did defend a racial hierarchy until at least the end of the 1780s", his views on race changed significantly in works published in the last decade of his life. In particular, she argues that Kant rejected past views related to racial hierarchies and the diminished rights or moral status of non-whites inPerpetual Peace(1795). This work also saw him providing extended arguments against Europeancolonialism, which he claimed was morally unjust and incompatible with the equal rights held by indigenous populations. Kleingeld argues that this shift in Kant's views later in life has often been forgotten or ignored in the literature on Kant's racist anthropology, and that the shift suggests a belated recognition of the fact that racial hierarchy was incompatible with a universalized moral framework.[208]
While Kant's racist rhetoric is indicative of the state of scholarship and science during the 18th century, German philosopherDaniel-Pascal Zornexplains the risk of taking period quotations out of context. Many of Kant's most outrageous quotations are from a series of articles from 1777–1788, a public exchange among Kant, Herder, the natural scientistGeorg Forster, and other scholars prominent in that period.[224][225][226]Kant asserts that all races of humankind are of the same species, challenging the position of Forster and others that the races were distinct species. While his commentary is clearly biased at times, certain extreme statements were patterned specifically to paraphrase or counter Forster and other authors.[206][207]By considering the full arc of Kant's scholarship, Zorn notes the progression in both his philosophical and his anthropological works, "with which he argues, against thezeitgeist, for the unity of humanity".[207]

## Views on women
Kant's views on women can be found in his works such asObservations(1764) andAnthropology(1798), in which, by denying women full capacity for moral principles and equal civic status, he treats them as morally and politically subordinate to men, not as complete agents in their own right. Kant believed that men and women are naturally different and ought to develop different kinds of excellence: men are characterized by reason, principles, and the “sublime,” while women are characterized by feeling, beauty, and sentiment. He held that women are intelligent but thought they do not act from abstract moral principles in the same way as men, instead possessing a “beautiful virtue” grounded in sympathy, care, and emotional judgment rather than rational duty. In his early work he viewed this feminine virtue as valuable and socially beneficial, but in his later writings he increasingly denied women the capacity for true moral autonomy, arguing that only rational, principle-governed action constitutes full virtue. As a result, Kant came to see women as unsuited for full moral and political equality, assigning them a primary role in marriage, social harmony, and the refinement of society rather than in independent moral or civic life.[214]

## Influence and legacy
Kant's influence on Western thought has been profound.[i]Although the basic tenets of Kant'stranscendental idealism(i.e., that space and time area prioriforms of human perception rather than real properties and the claim that formal logic and transcendental logic coincide) have been claimed to be falsified by modern science and logic,[227][228][229]and no longer set the intellectual agenda of contemporary philosophers, Kant is credited with having innovated the way philosophical inquiry has been carried on at least up to the early nineteenth century. This shift consisted of several closely related innovations that, although highly contentious in themselves, have become important in subsequent philosophy and in the social sciences broadly construed:
Kant's ideas have been incorporated into a variety of schools of thought. These includeGerman idealism,[233]Marxism,[234]positivism,[235]phenomenology,[236]existentialism,[237]critical theory,[238]linguistic philosophy,[239]structuralism,[240]post-structuralism,[241]anddeconstruction.[242]

## Historical influence
During his own life, much critical attention was paid to Kant's thought. He influencedReinhold,Fichte,Schelling,Hegel, andNovalisduring the 1780s and 1790s.Samuel Taylor Coleridgewas greatly influenced by Kant and helped to spread awareness of him, and of German Idealism generally, in the UK and the US. In hisBiographia Literaria(1817), he credits Kant's ideas in coming to believe that the mind is not a passive, but an active agent in the apprehension of reality. Hegel was one of Kant's first major critics. In Hegel's view the entire project of setting a "transcendental subject" (i.e., human consciousness) apart from the living individual as well as from nature, history, and society was fundamentally flawed,[243]although parts of that very project could be put to good use in a new direction. Similar concerns motivated Hegel's criticisms of Kant's concept of moral autonomy, to which Hegel opposed an ethic focused on the "ethical life" of the community.[j]In a sense, Hegel's notion of "ethical life" is meant to subsume, rather than replace,Kantian ethics. And Hegel can be seen as trying to defend Kant's idea of freedom as going beyond finite "desires", by means of reason. Thus, in contrast to later critics like Nietzsche or Russell, Hegel shares some of Kant's concerns.[k]
Kant's thinking on religion was used in Britain by philosophers such asThomas Carlyle[244]to challenge the nineteenth-century decline in religious faith. British Catholic writers, notablyG. K. ChestertonandHilaire Belloc, followed this approach.[245]Criticisms of Kant were common in the realist views of the newpositivismat that time.Arthur Schopenhauerwas strongly influenced by Kant'stranscendental idealism. LikeFriedrich Heinrich Jacobi,Salomon Maimon,Gottlob Ernst Schulze, and Fichte before him, Schopenhauer was critical of Kant's theory of the thing-in-itself. Things-in-themselves, they argued, are neither the cause of what we observe, nor are they completely beyond our access. Ever since theCritique of Pure Reason, philosophers have been critical of Kant's theory of the thing-in-itself. Many have argued that, if such a thing exists beyond experience, then one cannot posit that it affects us causally, since that would entail stretching the category "causality" beyond the realm of experience.[l]
With the success and wide influence of Hegel's writings, Kant's own influence began to wane, but a re-examination of his ideas began in Germany in 1865 with the publication ofKant und die EpigonenbyOtto Liebmann, whose motto was "Back to Kant". There proceeded an important revival of Kant's theoretical philosophy, known asneo-Kantianism. Kant's notion of "critique" has been more broadly influential. The early German Romantics, especiallyFriedrich Schlegelin his "Athenaeum Fragments", used Kant's reflexive conception of criticism in their Romantic theory of poetry.[246]Also in aesthetics,Clement Greenberg, in his classic essay "Modernist Painting", uses Kantian criticism, what Greenberg refers to as "immanent criticism", to justify the aims ofabstract painting, a movement Greenberg saw as aware of the key limitation—flatness—that makes up the medium of painting.[247]The French philosopherMichel Foucaultwas also greatly influenced by Kant's notion of "critique" and wrote several pieces on Kant for a re-thinking of the Enlightenment as a form of "critical thought". He went so far as to classify his own philosophy as a "critical history of modernity, rooted in Kant".[248]
Kant believed that mathematical truths were forms ofsynthetica prioriknowledge, which means they are necessary and universal, yet known through thea prioriintuition of space and time, as transcendental preconditions of experience.[249]Kant's often brief remarks aboutmathematicsinfluenced the mathematical school known asintuitionism, a movement inphilosophy of mathematicsopposed toDavid Hilbert'sformalism, andGottlob FregeandBertrand Russell'slogicism.[m]

## Influence on modern thinkers
With hisPerpetual Peace, Kant is considered to have foreshadowed many of the ideas that have come to form thedemocratic peace theory, one of the main controversies inpolitical science.[250]More concretely, constructivist theorist Alexander Wendt proposed that the anarchy of the international system could evolve from the "brutish" Hobbesian anarchy understood by realist theorists, through Lockean anarchy, and ultimately a Kantian anarchy in which states would see their self-interests as inextricably linked to the well being of other states, thus transforming international politics into a far more peaceful form.[251]
Prominent recent Kantians include the British philosophersP. F. Strawson,[n]Onora O'Neill,[252]andQuassim Cassam,[253]and the American philosophersWilfrid Sellars,[254]Lewis White Beck[255][256]andChristine Korsgaard.[o]Due to the influence of Strawson and Sellars, among others, there has been a renewed interest in Kant's view of the mind. Central to many debates inphilosophy of psychologyandcognitive scienceis Kant's conception of the unity of consciousness.[p]
Jürgen HabermasandJohn Rawlsare two significant political and moral philosophers whose work is strongly influenced by Kant's moral philosophy.[q]They have argued against relativism,[257]supporting the Kantian view that universality is essential to any viable moral philosophy.Mou Zongsan's study of Kant has been cited as a highly crucial part in the development of Mou's personal philosophy, namelyNew Confucianism. Widely regarded as the most influential Kant scholar in China, Mou's rigorous critique of Kant's philosophy—having translated all three of Kant'scritiques—served as an ardent attempt to reconcile Chinese and Western philosophy whilst increasing pressure toWesternizein China.[258][259]
Because of the thoroughness of Kant's paradigm shift, his influence extends well beyond this to thinkers who neither specifically refer to his work nor use his terminology. Kant's influence extended to the social, behavioral, and physical sciences—as in the sociology ofMax Weber, the psychology ofJean Piaget, andCarl Jung.[260][261]Kant's work on mathematics and synthetica prioriknowledge is also cited by the theoretical physicistAlbert Einsteinas an early influence on his intellectual development, although it was one which he later criticized and rejected.[262]In the 2020s, there was a renewed interest in Kant's theory of mind from the point of view offormal logicandcomputer science.[263]

## Bibliography
Unless otherwise noted, all citations are toThe Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant in English Translation, 16 vols., ed. Guyer, Paul, and Wood, Allen W. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. Citations in the article are to individual works per abbreviations inList of major worksbelow.

## List of major works
Abbreviations used in body of article are boldface in brackets. Unless otherwise noted, pagination is to the criticalAkademieedition, which can be found in the margins of the Cambridge translations.

## Collected works in German
Wilhelm Diltheyinaugurated the Academy edition (theAkademie-Ausgabeabbreviated asAAorAk) of Kant's writings (Gesammelte Schriften,Königlich-Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin, 1902–38) in 1895,[287]and served as its first editor. The volumes are grouped into four sections:
An electronic version is also available:Elektronische Edition der Gesammelten Werke Immanuel Kants(vols. 1–23).