## Java (programming language)
Javais ahigh-level,general-purpose,memory-safe,object-orientedprogramming language. It is intended to letprogrammerswrite once, run anywhere(WORA),[17]meaning thatcompiledJava code can run on all platforms that support Java without the need to recompile.[18]Java applications are typically compiled tobytecodethat can run on anyJava virtual machine(JVM) regardless of the underlyingcomputer architecture. Thesyntaxof Java is similar toCandC++, but has fewerlow-levelfacilities than either of them. The Java runtime provides dynamic capabilities (such asreflectionand runtime code modification) that are typically not available in traditional compiled languages.
Java gained popularity shortly after its release, and has been a popular programming language since then.[19]Java was the third most popular programming language in 2022[update]according toGitHub.[20]Although still widely popular, there has been a gradual decline in use of Java in recent years withother languages using JVMgaining popularity.[21]
Java was designed byJames GoslingatSun Microsystems. It was released in May 1995 as a core component of Sun'sJava platform. The original andreference implementationJavacompilers, virtual machines, andclass librarieswere released by Sun underproprietary licenses. As of May 2007, in compliance with the specifications of theJava Community Process, Sun hadrelicensedmost of its Java technologies under theGPL-2.0-onlylicense.Oracle, which bought Sun in 2010, offers its ownHotSpotJava virtual machine. However, the officialreference implementationis theOpenJDKJVM, which is open-source software used by most developers and is the default JVM for almost allLinux distributions.
Java 26is the current version as of March 2026[update]. Java 8, 11, 17, 21, and 25 arelong-term supportversions still under maintenance.

## History
James Gosling, Mike Sheridan, andPatrick Naughtoninitiated the Java language project in June 1991.[22]Java was originally designed for interactive television, but it was too advanced for the digital cable television industry at the time.[23]The language was initially calledOakafter anoaktree that stood outside Gosling's office. Later the project went by the nameGreenand was finally renamedJava, fromJava coffee, a type of coffee fromIndonesia.[24]Gosling designed Java with aC/C++-style syntax that system and application programmers would find familiar.[25]
Sun Microsystems released the first public implementation as Java 1.0 in 1996.[26]It promisedwrite once, run anywhere(WORA) functionality, providing no-cost run-times on popularplatforms. Fairly secure and featuring configurable security, it allowed network- and file-access restrictions. Majorweb browserssoon incorporated the ability to runJava appletswithin web pages, and Java quickly became popular. The Java 1.0 compiler was re-writtenin JavabyArthur van Hoffto comply strictly with the Java 1.0 language specification.[27]With the advent of Java 2 (released initially as J2SE 1.2 in December 1998 –  1999), new versions had multiple configurations built for different types of platforms.J2EEincluded technologies and APIs for enterprise applications typically run in server environments, while J2ME featured APIs optimized for mobile applications. The desktop version was renamed J2SE. In 2006, for marketing purposes, Sun renamed new J2 versions asJava EE,Java ME, andJava SE, respectively.
In 1997, Sun Microsystems approached theISO/IEC JTC 1standards body and later theEcma Internationalto formalize Java, but it soon withdrew from the process.[28][29][30]Java remains ade factostandard, controlled through theJava Community Process.[31]At one time, Sun made most of its Java implementations available without charge, despite theirproprietary softwarestatus. Sun generated revenue from Java through the selling of licenses for specialized products such as the Java Enterprise System.
On November 13, 2006, Sun released much of its Java virtual machine (JVM) asfree and open-source software(FOSS), under the terms of theGPL-2.0-onlylicense. On May 8, 2007, Sun finished the process, making all of its JVM's core code available underfree software/open-source distribution terms, aside from a small portion of code to which Sun did not hold the copyright.[32]
Sun's vice-president Rich Green said that Sun's ideal role with regard to Java was as anevangelist.[33]FollowingOracle Corporation's acquisition of Sun Microsystems in 2009–10, Oracle has described itself as the steward of Java technology with a relentless commitment to fostering a community of participation and transparency.[34]This did not prevent Oracle from filing a lawsuit against Google shortly after that for using Java inside theAndroid SDK(see theAndroidsection).
On April 2, 2010, James Gosling resigned fromOracle.[35]
In January 2016, Oracle announced that Java run-time environments based on JDK 9 will discontinue the browser plugin.[36]
Java software runs on most devices from laptops todata centers,game consolesto scientificsupercomputers.[37]
Oracle(and others) highly recommend uninstalling outdated and unsupported versions of Java, due to unresolved security issues in older versions.[38]

## Principles
There were five primary goals in creating the Java language:[18]

## Versions
As of September 2025[update], Java 8, 11, 17, 21, and 25 are supported aslong-term support(LTS) versions.[39]
Oracle released the last zero-cost public update for thelegacyversionJava 8LTS in January 2019 for commercial use, although it will otherwise still support Java 8 with public updates for personal use indefinitely. Other vendors such asAdoptiumcontinue to offer free builds of OpenJDK's long-term support (LTS) versions. These builds may include additional security patches and bug fixes.[40]
Major release versions of Java, along with their release dates:

## Editions
Sun has defined and supports four editions of Java targeting different application environments and segmented many of itsAPIsso that they belong to one of the platforms. The platforms are:
Theclassesin the Java APIs are organized into separate groups calledpackages. Each package contains a set of relatedinterfaces, classes, subpackages andexceptions.
Sun also provided an edition calledPersonal Javathat has been superseded by later, standards-based Java ME configuration-profile pairings.

## Java JVM and bytecode
One design goal of Java isportability, which means that programs written for the Java platform must run similarly on any combination of hardware and operating system with adequate run time support. This is achieved by compiling the Java language code to an intermediate representation calledJava bytecode, instead of directly to architecture-specificmachine code. Java bytecode instructions are analogous to machine code, but they are intended to be executed by avirtual machine(VM) written specifically for the host hardware.End-userscommonly use aJava Runtime Environment(JRE) installed on their device for standalone Java applications or a web browser forJava applets.
Standard libraries provide a generic way to access host-specific features such as graphics,threading, andnetworking.
The use of universal bytecode makes porting simple. However, the overhead ofinterpretingbytecode into machine instructions made interpreted programs almost always run more slowly than nativeexecutables.Just-in-time(JIT) compilers that compile byte-codes to machine code during runtime were introduced from an early stage. Java's Hotspot compiler is actually two compilers in one, withGraalVM(included in e.g. Java 11, but removed as of Java 16) allowingtiered compilation.[52]Java itself is platform-independent and is adapted to the particular platform it is to run on by aJava virtual machine(JVM), which translates theJava bytecodeinto the platform's machine language.[53]

## Performance
Programs written in Java have a reputation for being slower and requiring more memory than those written inC++.[54][55]However, Java programs' execution speed improved significantly with the introduction ofjust-in-time compilationin 1997/1998 forJava 1.1,[56]the addition of language features supporting better code analysis (such as inner classes, the StringBuilder class, optional assertions, etc.), and optimizations in the Java virtual machine, such asHotSpotbecoming Sun's default JVM in 2000. With Java 1.5, the performance was improved with the addition of thejava.util.concurrentpackage, includinglock-freeimplementations of theConcurrentMapsand other multi-core collections, and it was improved further with Java 1.6.

## Non-JVM
Some platforms offer direct hardware support for Java; there are micro controllers that can run Java bytecode in hardware instead of a software Java virtual machine,[57]and someARM-based processors could have hardware support for executing Java bytecode through theirJazelleoption, though support has mostly been dropped in current implementations of ARM.

## Automatic memory management
Java uses anautomatic garbage collectorto manage memory in theobject lifecycle. The programmer determines when objects are created, and the Java runtime is responsible for recovering the memory once objects are no longer in use. Once no references to an object remain, theunreachable memorybecomes eligible to be freed automatically by the garbage collector. Something similar to amemory leakmay still occur if a programmer's code holds a reference to an object that is no longer needed, typically when objects that are no longer needed are stored in containers that are still in use.[58]If methods for a non-existent object are called, anull pointerexception is thrown.[59][60]
One of the ideas behind Java's automatic memory management model is that programmers can be spared the burden of having to perform manual memory management. In some languages, memory for the creation of objects is implicitly allocated on thestackor explicitly allocated and deallocated from theheap. In the latter case, the responsibility of managing memory resides with the programmer. If the program does not deallocate an object, amemory leakoccurs.[58]If the program attempts to access or deallocate memory that has already been deallocated, the result is undefined and difficult to predict, and the program is likely to become unstable or crash. This can be partially remedied by the use ofsmart pointers, but these add overhead and complexity. Garbage collection does not preventlogical memoryleaks, i.e. those where the memory is still referenced but never used.[58]
Garbage collection may happen at any time. Ideally, it will occur when a program is idle. It is guaranteed to be triggered if there is insufficient free memory on the heap to allocate a new object; this can cause a program to stall momentarily. Explicit memory management is not possible in Java, however it is possible to  make the JVM do garbage collection manually[61].
Java does not support C/C++ stylepointer arithmetic,[62]where object addresses can be arithmetically manipulated (e.g. by adding or subtracting an offset). This allows the garbage collector to relocate referenced objects and ensures type safety and security.
As in C++ and some other object-oriented languages, variables of Java'sprimitive data typesare either stored directly in fields (for objects) or on thestack(for methods) rather than on the heap, as is commonly true for non-primitive data types (but seeescape analysis). This was a conscious decision by Java's designers for performance reasons.
Java contains multiple types of garbage collectors. Since Java 9, HotSpot uses theGarbage First Garbage Collector(G1GC) as the default.[63]However, there are also several other garbage collectors that can be used to manage the heap, such as the Z Garbage Collector (ZGC) introduced in Java 11, and Shenandoah GC, introduced in Java 12 but unavailable in Oracle-produced OpenJDK builds. Shenandoah is instead available in third-party builds of OpenJDK, such asEclipse Temurin. For most applications in Java, G1GC is sufficient. In prior versions of Java, such as Java 8, theParallel Garbage Collectorwas used as the default garbage collector.[citation needed]
Having solved the memory management problem does not relieve the programmer of the burden of handling properly other kinds of resources, like network or database connections, file handles, etc., especially in the presence of exceptions.[citation needed]

## Syntax
The syntax of Java is largely influenced byC++andC. Unlike C++, which combines the syntax for structured, generic, and object-oriented programming, Java was built almost exclusively as an object-oriented language.[18]All code is written inside classes, and every data item is an object, with the exception of the primitive data types, (i.e. integers, floating-point numbers,boolean values, and characters), which are not objects for performance reasons.
Unlike C++, Java does not supportoperator overloading[64]ormultiple inheritancefor classes, though multiple inheritance is supported forinterfaces.[65]
Java usescommentssimilar to those of C++. There are three different styles of comments: a single line style marked with two slashes (//), a multiple line style opened with/*and closed with*/, and theJavadoccommenting style opened with/**and closed with*/. The Javadoc style of commenting allows the user to run the Javadoc executable to create documentation for the program and can be read by someintegrated development environments(IDEs) such asEclipseto allow developers to access documentation within the IDE.

## Hello world
The following is an example of a"Hello, World!" programin the traditional Java syntax:
Java 25 introduced a simplified syntax for the main class and main method, which enables users to write small Java programs succinctly:[66][67]

## Applet
Java applets were programs embedded in other applications, mainly in web pages displayed in web browsers. The Java applet API was deprecated with the release of Java 9 in 2017.[68][69]

## Servlet
Java servlettechnology provides Web developers with a simple, consistent mechanism for extending the functionality of a Web server and for accessing existing business systems. Servlets areserver-sideJava EE components that generate responses to requests fromclients. Most of the time, this means generatingHTMLpages in response toHTTPrequests, although there are a number of other standard servlet classes available, for example forWebSocketcommunication.
The Java servlet API has to some extent been superseded (but still used under the hood) by two standard Java technologies for web services:
Typical implementations of these APIs on Application Servers or Servlet Containers use a standard servlet for handling all interactions with theHTTPrequests and responses that delegate to the web service methods for the actual business logic.

## JavaServer Pages
JavaServer Pages (JSP) areserver-sideJava EE components that generate responses, typicallyHTMLpages, toHTTPrequests fromclients. JSPs embed Java code in an HTML page by using the specialdelimiters<%and%>. A JSP is compiled to a Javaservlet, a Java application in its own right, the first time it is accessed. After that, the generated servlet creates the response.[70]

## Swing application
Swingis a graphical user interfacelibraryfor the Java SE platform. It is possible to specify a different look and feel through thepluggable look and feelsystem of Swing. Clones ofWindows,GTK+, andMotifare supplied by Sun.Applealso provides anAqualook and feel formacOS. Where prior implementations of these looks and feels may have been considered lacking, Swing in Java SE 6 addresses this problem by using more nativeGUI widgetdrawing routines of the underlying platforms.[71]

## JavaFX application
JavaFXis asoftware platformfor creating and deliveringdesktop applications, as well asrich web applicationsthat can run across a wide variety of devices. JavaFX is intended to replaceSwingas the standardgraphical user interface(GUI) library forJava SE, but since JDK 11 JavaFX has not been in the core JDK and instead in a separate module.[72]JavaFX has support fordesktop computersandweb browsersonMicrosoft Windows,Linux, andmacOS. JavaFX does not have support for native OS look and feels.[73]

## Generics
In 2004,genericswere added to the Java language, as part of J2SE 5.0. Prior to the introduction of generics, each variable declaration had to be of a specific type. For container classes, for example, this is a problem because there is no easy way to create a container that accepts only specific types of objects. Either the container operates on all subtypes of a class or interface, usuallyObject, or a different container class has to be created for each contained class. Generics allow compile-time type checking without having to create many container classes, each containing almost identical code. In addition to enabling more efficient code, certain runtime exceptions are prevented from occurring, by issuing compile-time errors. If Java prevented all runtime type errors (ClassCastExceptions) from occurring, it would betype safe.
In 2016, the type system of Java was provenunsoundin that it is possible to use generics to construct classes and methods that allow assignment of an instance of one class to a variable of another unrelated class. Such code is accepted by the compiler, but fails at run time with a class cast exception.[74]

## Criticism
Criticisms directed at Java include the implementation of generics,[75]speed,[54]the handling of unsigned numbers,[76]the implementation of floating-point arithmetic,[77]and a history of security vulnerabilities in the primary Java VM implementationHotSpot.[78]Developers have criticized the complexity and verbosity of the Java Persistence API (JPA), a standard part of Java EE. This has led to increased adoption of higher-level abstractions like Spring Data JPA, which aims to simplify database operations and reduce boilerplate code. The growing popularity of such frameworks suggests limitations in the standard JPA implementation's ease-of-use for modern Java development.

## Class libraries
TheJava Class Libraryis thestandard library, developed to support application development in Java. It is controlled byOraclein cooperation with others through theJava Community Processprogram.[79]Companies or individuals participating in this process can influence the design and development of the APIs. This process has been a subject of controversy during the 2010s.[80]The class library contains features such as:

## Documentation
Javadoc is a comprehensive documentation system, created bySun Microsystems. It provides developers with an organized system for documenting their code. Javadoc comments have an extra asterisk at the beginning, i.e. the delimiters are/**and*/, whereas the normal multi-line comments in Java are delimited by/*and*/, and single-line comments start with//.[88]

## Implementations
Oracle Corporationowns the official implementation of the Java SE platform, due to its acquisition ofSun Microsystemson January 27, 2010. This implementation is based on the original implementation of Java by Sun. The Oracle implementation is available forWindows,macOS,Linux, andSolaris. Because Java lacks any formal standardization recognized byEcma International, ISO/IEC, ANSI, or other third-party standards organizations, the Oracle implementation is thede facto standard.
The Oracle implementation is packaged into two different distributions: The Java Runtime Environment (JRE) which contains the parts of the Java SE platform required to run Java programs and is intended for end users, and theJava Development Kit(JDK), which is intended for software developers and includes development tools such as theJava compiler,Javadoc,Jar, and adebugger. Oracle has also releasedGraalVM, a high performance Java dynamic compiler and interpreter.
OpenJDKis another Java SE implementation that is licensed under the GNU GPL. The implementation started when Sun began releasing the Java source code under the GPL. As of Java SE 7, OpenJDK is the official Java reference implementation.
The goal of Java is to make all implementations of Java compatible. Historically, Sun's trademark license for usage of the Java brand insists that all implementations becompatible. This resulted in a legal dispute withMicrosoftafter Sun claimed that the Microsoft implementation did not supportJava remote method invocation(RMI) orJava Native Interface(JNI) and had added platform-specific features of their own. Sun sued in 1997, and, in 2001, won a settlement of US$20 million, as well as a court order enforcing the terms of the license from Sun.[89]As a result, Microsoft no longer ships Java withWindows.
Platform-independent Java is essential toJava EE, and an even more rigorous validation is required to certify an implementation. This environment enables portable server-side applications.

## Use outside the Java platform
The Java programming language requires the presence of a software platform in order for compiled programs to be executed.
Oracle supplies theJava platformfor use with Java. TheAndroid SDKis an alternative software platform, used primarily for developingAndroid applicationswith its own GUI system.

## Android
The Java language is a key pillar inAndroid, anopen sourcemobile operating system. Although Android, built on theLinux kernel, is written largely in C, theAndroid SDKuses the Java language as the basis for Android applications but does not use any of its standard GUI, SE, ME or other established Java standards.[90]The bytecode language supported by the Android SDK is incompatible with Java bytecode and runs on its own virtual machine, optimized for low-memory devices such assmartphonesandtablet computers. Depending on the Android version, the bytecode is either interpreted by theDalvik virtual machineor compiled into native code by theAndroid Runtime.
Android does not provide the full Java SE standard library, although the Android SDK does include an independent implementation of a large subset of it. It supports Java 6 and some Java 7 features, offering an implementation compatible with the standard library (Apache Harmony).

## Controversy
The use of Java-related technology in Android led to a legal dispute between Oracle and Google. On May 7, 2012, a San Francisco jury found that if APIs could be copyrighted, then Google had infringed Oracle's copyrights by the use of Java in Android devices.[91]District JudgeWilliam Alsupruled on May 31, 2012, that APIs cannot be copyrighted,[92]but this was reversed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in May 2014.[93]On May 26, 2016, the district court decided in favor of Google, ruling the copyright infringement of the Java API in Android constitutes fair use.[94]In March 2018, this ruling was overturned by the Appeals Court, which sent down the case of determining the damages to federal court in San Francisco.[95]Google filed a petition forwrit of certiorariwith theSupreme Court of the United Statesin January 2019 to challenge the two rulings that were made by the Appeals Court in Oracle's favor.[96]On April 5, 2021, the Court ruled 6–2 in Google's favor, that its use of Java APIs should be consideredfair use. However, the court refused to rule on the copyrightability of APIs, choosing instead to determine their ruling by considering Java's API copyrightable "purely for argument's sake."[97]