## Linguistics
Linguisticsis the scientific study oflanguage.[1][2][3]The areas of linguistic analysis aresyntax(rules governing the structure of sentences),semantics(meaning),morphology(structure of words),phonetics(speech sounds and equivalent gestures insign languages),phonology(the abstract sound system of a particular language, and analogous systems of sign languages), andpragmatics(how the context of use contributes to meaning).[4]Subdisciplines such asbiolinguistics(the study of the biological variables and evolution of language) andpsycholinguistics(the study of psychological factors in human language) bridge many of these divisions.[5]
Linguistics encompassesmany branches and subfieldsthat span both theoretical and practical applications.[6]Theoretical linguisticsis concerned with understanding theuniversalandfundamental natureof language and developing a general theoretical framework for describing it.Applied linguisticsseeks to utilize the scientific findings of the study of language for practical purposes, such as developing methods of improving language education and literacy.Mathematical linguisticsis the application ofmathematicsto model phenomena and solve problems in general linguistics andtheoretical linguistics.Computational linguisticsis aninterdisciplinaryfield concerned with thecomputational modellingofnatural language, as well as the study of appropriate computational approaches to linguistic questions.
Linguistic features may be studied through a variety of perspectives:synchronically(by describing the structure of a language at a specific point in time) ordiachronically(through the historical development of a language over a period of time), inmonolingualsor inmultilinguals, among children or among adults, in terms of how it is being learnt or how it was acquired, as abstract objects or as cognitive structures, through written texts or through oral elicitation, and finally through mechanical data collection or practical fieldwork.[7]
Linguistics emerged from the field ofphilology, of which some branches are more qualitative andholisticin approach.[8]Today, philology and linguistics are variably described as related fields, subdisciplines, or separate fields of language study, but, by and large, linguistics can be seen as an umbrella term.[9]Linguistics is also related to thephilosophy of language,stylistics,rhetoric,semiotics,lexicography, andtranslation.

## Historical linguistics
Historical linguistics is the study of how language changes over history, particularly with regard to a specific language or a group of languages.Western trendsin historical linguistics date back to roughly the late 18th century, when the discipline grew out ofphilology, the study of ancient texts and oral traditions.[10]
Historical linguistics emerged as one of the first few sub-disciplines in the field, and was most widely practised during the late 19th century.[11]Despite a shift in focus in the 20th century towardsformalismandgenerative grammar, which studies theuniversalproperties of language, historical research today still remains a significant field of linguistic inquiry. Subfields of the discipline includelanguage changeandgrammaticalization.
Historical linguistics studies language change either diachronically (through a comparison of different time periods in the past and present) or in asynchronicmanner (by observing developments between different variations that exist within the current linguistic stage of a language).[12]
At first, historical linguistics was the cornerstone ofcomparative linguistics, which involves a study of the relationship between different languages.[13]At that time, scholars of historical linguistics were only concerned with creating different categories oflanguage families, and reconstructingprehistoricproto-languages by using both thecomparative methodand the method ofinternal reconstruction. Internal reconstruction is the method by which an element that contains a certain meaning is re-used in different contexts or environments where there is a variation in either sound or analogy.[13][better source needed]
The reason for this had been to describe well-knownIndo-European languages, many of which had detailed documentation and long written histories. Scholars of historical linguistics also studiedUralic languages, another European language family for which very little written material existed back then. After that, there also followed significant work on thecorporaof other languages, such as theAustronesian languagesand theNative American language families.
In historical work, theuniformitarian principleis generally the underlying working hypothesis, occasionally also clearly expressed.[14]The principle was expressed early byWilliam Dwight Whitney, who considered it imperative, a "must", of historical linguistics to "look to find the same principle operative also in the very outset of that [language] history."[15]
The above approach of comparativism in linguistics is now, however, only a small part of the much broader discipline called historical linguistics. The comparative study of specific Indo-European languages is considered a highly specialized field today, while comparative research is carried out over the subsequent internal developments in a language: in particular, over the development of modern standard varieties of languages, and over the development of a language from its standardized form to its varieties.[citation needed]
For instance, some scholars also tried to establishsuper-families, linking, for example, Indo-European, Uralic, and other language families to a hypotheticalNostratic language group.[16][unreliable source?]These attempts are still not widely accepted as credible methods. A limit of around 10,000 years is often assumed for the functional purpose of conducting research.[17]It is also hard to date various proto-languages. Even though several methods are available, these languages can be dated only approximately.[18]
In modern historical linguistics, we examine how languages change over time, focusing on the relationships between dialects within a specific period. This includes studying morphological, syntactical, and phonetic shifts. Connections between dialects in the past and present are also explored.[19]

## Syntax
Syntax is the study of how words andmorphemescombine to form larger units such asphrasesandsentences. Central concerns of syntax includeword order,grammatical relations,constituency,[20]agreement, the nature of crosslinguistic variation, and the relationship between form and meaning. There are numerous approaches to syntax that differ in their central assumptions and goals.

## Morphology
Morphology is the study ofwords, including the principles by which they are formed, and how they relate to one another within a language.[21][22]Most approaches to morphology investigate the structure of words in terms ofmorphemes, which are the smallest units in a language with some independentmeaning. Morphemes includerootsthat can exist as words by themselves, but also categories such asaffixesthat can only appear as part of a larger word. For example, in English the rootcatchand the suffix-ingare both morphemes;catchmay appear as its own word, or it may be combined with-ingto form the new wordcatching. Morphology also analyzes how words behave asparts of speech, and how they may beinflectedto expressgrammatical categoriesincludingnumber,tense, andaspect. Concepts such asproductivityare concerned with how speakers create words in specific contexts, which evolves over the history of a language.
The discipline that deals specifically with the sound changes occurring within morphemes ismorphophonology.

## Semantics and pragmatics
Semantics and pragmatics are branches of linguistics concerned with meaning. These subfields have traditionally been divided according to aspects of meaning: "semantics" refers to grammatical and lexical meanings, while "pragmatics" is concerned with meaning in context. Within linguistics, the subfield offormal semanticsstudies thedenotationsof sentences and how they arecomposedfrom the meanings of their constituent expressions. Formal semantics draws heavily onphilosophy of languageand uses formal tools from logic andcomputer science. On the other hand,cognitive semanticsexplains linguistic meaning via aspects of general cognition, drawing on ideas from cognitive science such asprototype theory.
Pragmatics focuses on phenomena such asspeech acts,implicature, andtalk in interaction.[23]Unlike semantics, which examines meaning that is conventional or "coded" in a given language, pragmatics studies how the transmission of meaning depends not only on the structural and linguistic knowledge (grammar, lexicon, etc.) of the speaker and listener, but also on the context of the utterance,[24]any pre-existing knowledge about those involved, the inferred intent of the speaker, and other factors.[25]

## Phonetics and phonology
Phonetics and phonology are branches of linguistics concerned with sounds (or the equivalent aspects of sign languages). Phonetics is largely concerned with the physical aspects of sounds such as theirarticulation, acoustics, production, and perception.Phonologyis concerned with the linguistic abstractions and categorizations of sounds, and it tells us what sounds are in a language, how they do and can combine into words, and explains why certain phonetic features are important to identifying a word.[26]

## Typology
Linguistic typology(or language typology) is a field of linguistics that studies and classifies languages according to their structural features to allow their comparison. Its aim is to describe and explain the structural diversity and the common properties of the world's languages.[27]Its subdisciplines include, but are not limited to: phonological typology, which deals with sound features; syntactic typology, which deals with word order and form; lexical typology, which deals with language vocabulary; and theoretical typology, which aims to explain the universal tendencies.[28]

## Structures
Linguistic structures are pairings of meaning and form. Any particular pairing of meaning and form is aSaussureanlinguistic sign. For instance, the meaning "cat" is represented worldwide with a wide variety of different sound patterns (in oral languages), movements of the hands and face (insign languages), and written symbols (in written languages). Linguistic patterns have proven their importance for theknowledge engineeringfield especially with the ever-increasing amount of available data.
Linguists focusing on structure attempt to understand the rules regarding language use that native speakers know (not always consciously). All linguistic structures can be broken down into component parts that are combined according to (sub)conscious rules, over multiple levels of analysis. For instance, consider the structure of the word "tenth" on two different levels of analysis. On the level of internal word structure (known as morphology), the word "tenth" is made up of one linguistic form indicating a number and another form indicating ordinality. The rule governing the combination of these forms ensures that the ordinality marker "th" follows the number "ten". On the level of sound structure (known as phonology), structural analysis shows that the "n" sound in "tenth" is made differently from the "n" sound in "ten" spoken alone. Although most speakers of English are consciously aware of the rules governing internal structure of the word pieces of "tenth", they are less often aware of the rule governing its sound structure. Linguists focused on structure find and analyze rules such as these, which govern how native speakers use language.[citation needed]

## Grammar
Grammar is a system of rules which governs the production and use of utterances in a given language. These rules apply to sound[29]as well as meaning, and include componential subsets of rules, such as those pertaining tophonology(the organization of phonetic sound systems),morphology(the formation and composition of words), andsyntax(the formation and composition of phrases and sentences).[4]Modernframeworks that deal with the principles of grammarincludestructuralandfunctional linguistics, andgenerative linguistics.[30]
Sub-fields that focus on a grammatical study of language include the following:

## Discourse
Discourse is language as social practice (Baynham, 1995) and is a multilayered concept. As a social practice, discourse embodies different ideologies through written and spoken texts. Discourse analysis can examine or expose these ideologies. Discourse not only influences genre, which is selected based on specific contexts but also, at a micro level, shapes language as text (spoken or written) down to the phonological and lexico-grammatical levels. Grammar and discourse are linked as parts of a system.[32]A particular discourse becomes a language variety when it is used in this way for a particular purpose, and is referred to as aregister.[33]There may be certain lexical additions (new words) that are brought into play because of the expertise of the community of people within a certain domain of specialization. Thus, registers and discourses distinguish themselves not only through specialized vocabulary but also, in some cases, through distinct stylistic choices. People in the medical fraternity, for example, may use some medical terminology in their communication that is specialized to the field of medicine. This is often referred to as being part of the "medical discourse", and so on.

## Lexicon
The lexicon is a catalogue of words and terms that are stored in a speaker's mind. The lexicon consists of words andbound morphemes, which are parts of words that can not stand alone, likeaffixes. In some analyses, compound words and certain classes of idiomatic expressions and other collocations are also considered to be part of the lexicon. Dictionaries represent attempts at listing, in alphabetical order, the lexicon of a given language; usually, however, bound morphemes are not included.Lexicography, closely linked with the domain of semantics, is the science of mapping the words into an encyclopedia or a dictionary. The creation and addition of new words (into the lexicon) is called coining orneologization,[34]and the new words are calledneologisms.
It is often believed that a speaker's capacity for language lies in the quantity of words stored in the lexicon. However, this is often considered a myth by linguists. The capacity for the use of language is considered by many linguists to lie primarily in the domain of grammar, and to be linked withcompetence, rather than with the growth of vocabulary. Even a very small lexicon is theoretically capable of producing an infinite number of sentences.
Vocabularysize is relevant as a measure of comprehension. There is general consensus that reading comprehension of a written text in English requires 98% coverage, meaning that the person understands 98% of the words in the text.[35]The question of how much vocabulary is needed is therefore related to which texts or conversations need to be understood. A common estimate is 6-7,000word familiesto understand a wide range of conversations and 8-9,000 word families to be able to read a wide range of written texts.[36]

## Style
Stylisticsalso involves the study of written, signed, or spoken discourse through varying speech communities, genres, and editorial or narrative formats in the mass media.[37]It involves the study and interpretation of texts for aspects of their linguistic and tonal style. Stylistic analysis entails the analysis of description of particulardialectsandregistersused by speech communities. Stylistic features includerhetoric,[38]diction, stress, satire,irony, dialogue, and other forms of phonetic variations. Stylistic analysis can also include the study of language in canonical works of literature, popular fiction, news, advertisements, and other forms of communication in popular culture as well. It is usually seen as a variation in communication that changes from speaker to speaker and community to community. In short, Stylistics is the interpretation of text.
In the 1960s,Jacques Derrida, for instance, further distinguished between speech and writing, by proposing that written language be studied as a linguistic medium of communication in itself.[39]Palaeographyis therefore the discipline that studies the evolution of written scripts (as signs and symbols) in language.[40]The formal study of language also led to the growth of fields likepsycholinguistics, which explores the representation and function of language in the mind;neurolinguistics, which studies language processing in the brain;biolinguistics, which studies the biology and evolution of language; andlanguage acquisition, which investigates how children and adults acquire the knowledge of one or more languages.

## Methodology
Modern linguistics is primarilydescriptive.[41]Linguists describe and explain features of language without making subjective judgments on whether a particular feature or usage is "good" or "bad". This is analogous to practice in other sciences: azoologiststudies the animal kingdom without making subjective judgments on whether a particular species is "better" or "worse" than another.
Prescription, on the other hand, is an attempt to promote particular linguistic usages over others, often favoring a particular dialect or "acrolect". This may have the aim of establishing alinguistic standard, which can aid communication over large geographical areas. It may also, however, be an attempt by speakers of one language or dialect to exert influence over speakers of other languages or dialects (seeLinguistic imperialism). An extreme version of prescriptivism can be found amongcensors, who attempt to eradicate words and structures that they consider to be destructive to society. Prescription, however, may be practised appropriately inlanguage instruction, like inELT, where certain fundamental grammatical rules and lexical items need to be introduced to a second-language speaker who is attempting toacquirethe language.[citation needed]

## Sources
Most contemporary linguists work under the assumption thatspoken dataandsigned dataare more fundamental thanwritten data. This is because
Nonetheless, linguists agree that the study of written language can be worthwhile and valuable. For research that relies oncorpus linguisticsandcomputational linguistics, written language is often much more convenient for processing large amounts of linguistic data. Large corpora of spoken language are difficult to create and hard to find, and are typicallytranscribedand written. In addition, linguists have turned to text-based discourse occurring in various formats ofcomputer-mediated communicationas a viable site for linguistic inquiry.
The study of writing systems themselves, graphemics, is, in any case, considered a branch of linguistics.

## Analysis
Before the 20th century, linguists analysed language on adiachronicplane, which was historical in focus. This meant that they would compare linguistic features and try to analyse language from the point of view of how it had changed between then and later. However, with the rise of Saussurean linguistics in the 20th century, the focus shifted to a moresynchronicapproach, where the study was geared towards analysis and comparison between different language variations, which existed at the same given point of time.
At another level, thesyntagmaticplane of linguistic analysis entails the comparison between the way words are sequenced, within the syntax of a sentence. For example, the article "the" is followed by a noun, because of the syntagmatic relation between the words. Theparadigmaticplane, on the other hand, focuses on an analysis that is based on the paradigms or concepts that are embedded in a given text. In this case, words of the same type or class may be replaced in the text with each other to achieve the same conceptual understanding.

## History
The earliest activities in thedescription of languagehave been attributed to the 6th-century BC Indian grammarianPāṇini[42][43]who composed aformal descriptionof theSanskrit languagein hisAṣṭādhyāyī.[44][45]Today, modern-day theories ongrammaremploy many of the principles that were laid down then.[46]

## Nomenclature
Before the 20th century, the termphilology, first attested in 1716,[47]was commonly used to refer to the study of language, which was then predominantly historical in focus.[48][49]SinceFerdinand de Saussure's insistence on the importance ofsynchronic analysis, however, this focus has shifted[49]and the termphilologyis now generally used for the "study of a language's grammar, history, and literary tradition", especially in the United States[50](where philology has never been very popularly considered as the "science of language").[47]
Although the termlinguistin the sense of "a student of language" dates from 1641,[51]the termlinguisticsis first attested in 1847.[51]It is now the usual term in English for the scientific study of language,[52][53]thoughlinguistic scienceis sometimes used.
Linguistics is amulti-disciplinaryfield of research that combines tools from natural sciences, social sciences,formal sciences, and the humanities.[54][55][56][57]Many linguists, such as David Crystal, conceptualize the field as being primarily scientific.[58]The termlinguistapplies to someone who studies language or is a researcher within the field, or to someone who uses the tools of the discipline to describe and analyse specific languages.[59]

## Early grammarians
An early formal study of language was undertaken in India by the 6th-century BC grammarianPāṇini, who formulated 3,959 rules of Sanskritmorphology. Pāṇini's systematic classification of the sounds ofSanskritinto consonants and vowels, and word classes, such as nouns and verbs, was the first known instance of its kind. In the Middle East,Sibawayh, a Persian, made a detailed description of Arabic in AD 760 in his monumental work,Al-kitab fii an-naħw(الكتاب في النحو,The Book on Grammar), the first known author to distinguish betweensoundsandphonemes (sounds as units of a linguistic system). Western interest in the study of languages began somewhat later than in the East,[60]but the grammarians of the classical languages did not use the same methods or reach the same conclusions as their contemporaries in the Indic world. Early interest in language in the West was a part of philosophy, not of grammatical description. The first insights into semantic theory were made byPlatoin hisCratylusdialogue, where he argues that words denote concepts that are eternal and exist in the world of ideas. This work is the first to use the word etymology to describe the history of a word's meaning. Around 280 BC, one ofAlexander the Great's successors founded a university (seeMusaeum) inAlexandria, where a school of philologists studied the ancient texts in Greek, and taught Greek to speakers of other languages. While this school was the first to use the word "grammar" in its modern sense, Plato had used the word in its original meaning as "téchnē grammatikḗ" (Τέχνη Γραμματική), the "art of writing", which is also the title of one of the most important works of the Alexandrine school byDionysius Thrax.[61]Throughout theMiddle Ages, the study of language was subsumed under the topic of philology, the study of ancient languages and texts, practised by such educators asRoger Ascham,Wolfgang Ratke, andJohn Amos Comenius.[62]

## Comparative philology
In the 18th century, the first use of thecomparative methodbyWilliam Jonessparked the rise ofcomparative linguistics.[63]Bloomfield attributes "the first great scientific linguistic work of the world" toJacob Grimm, who wroteDeutsche Grammatik.[64]It was soon followed by other authors writing similar comparative studies on other language groups of Europe. The study of language was broadened fromIndo-Europeanto language in general byWilhelm von Humboldt, of whom Bloomfield asserts:[64]
This study received its foundation at the hands of the Prussian statesman and scholar Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767–1835), especially in the first volume of his work on Kavi, the literary language of Java, entitledÜber die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen Sprachbaues und ihren Einfluß auf die geistige Entwickelung des Menschengeschlechts(On the Variety of the Structure of Human Language and its Influence upon the Mental Development of the Human Race).

## 20th-century developments
There was a shift of focus from historical and comparative linguistics to synchronic analysis in early 20th century. Structural analysis was improved byLeonard Bloomfield,Louis Hjelmslev; andZellig Harriswho also developed methods ofdiscourse analysis. Functional analysis was developed by thePrague linguistic circleandAndré Martinet. As sound recording devices became commonplace in the 1960s, dialectal recordings were made and archived, and theaudio-lingual methodprovided a technological solution to foreign language learning. The 1960s also saw a new rise of comparative linguistics: the study oflanguage universalsinlinguistic typology. Towards the end of the century the field of linguistics became divided into further areas of interest with the advent oflanguage technologyand digitalizedcorpora.[65][66][67]

## Sociolinguistics
Sociolinguistics is the study of how language is shaped by social factors. This sub-discipline focuses on the synchronic approach of linguistics, and looks at how a language in general, or a set of languages, display variation and varieties at a given point in time. The study of language variation and the different varieties of language through dialects, registers, and idiolects can be tackled through a study of style, as well as through analysis of discourse. Sociolinguists research both style and discourse in language, as well as the theoretical factors that are at play between language and society.

## Developmental linguistics
Developmental linguistics is the study of the development of linguistic ability in individuals, particularlythe acquisition of languagein childhood. Some of the questions that developmental linguistics looks into are how children acquire different languages, how adults can acquire a second language, and what the process of language acquisition is.[68]

## Neurolinguistics
Neurolinguistics is the study of the structures in the human brain that underlie grammar and communication. Researchers are drawn to the field from a variety of backgrounds, bringing along a variety of experimental techniques as well as widely varying theoretical perspectives. Much work in neurolinguistics is informed by models inpsycholinguisticsandtheoretical linguistics, and is focused on investigating how the brain can implement the processes that theoretical and psycholinguistics propose are necessary in producing and comprehending language. Neurolinguists study the physiological mechanisms by which the brain processes information related to language, and evaluate linguistic and psycholinguistic theories, usingaphasiology,brain imaging, electrophysiology, and computer modelling. Amongst the structures of the brain involved in the mechanisms of neurolinguistics, the cerebellum which contains the highest numbers of neurons has a major role in terms of predictions required to produce language.[69]

## Applied linguistics
Linguists are largely concerned with finding anddescribingthe generalities and varieties both within particular languages and among all languages.Applied linguisticstakes the results of those findings and "applies" them to other areas. Linguistic research is commonly applied to areas such aslanguage education,lexicography, translation,language planning, which involves governmental policy implementation related to language use, andnatural language processing. "Applied linguistics" has been argued to be something of a misnomer.[70]Applied linguists actually focus on making sense of and engineering solutions for real-world linguistic problems, and not literally "applying" existing technical knowledge from linguistics. Moreover, they commonly apply technical knowledge from multiple sources, such as sociology (e.g., conversation analysis) and anthropology. (Constructed languagefits under Applied linguistics.)
Today, computers are widely used in many areas of applied linguistics.Speech synthesisandspeech recognitionuse phonetic and phonemic knowledge to providevoice interfacesto computers. Applications ofcomputational linguisticsinmachine translation,computer-assisted translation, andnatural language processingare areas of applied linguistics that have come to the forefront. Their influence has had an effect on theories of syntax and semantics, as modelling syntactic and semantic theories on computers constraints.
Linguistic analysis is a sub-discipline of applied linguistics used by many governments to verify the claimed nationality of people seeking asylum who do not hold the necessary documentation to prove their claim.[71]This often takes the form of an interview by personnel in an immigration department. Depending on the country, this interview is conducted either in the asylum seeker'snative languagethrough aninterpreteror in an internationallingua francalike English.[71]Australia uses the former method, while Germany employs the latter; the Netherlands uses either method depending on the languages involved.[71]Tape recordings of the interview then undergo language analysis, which can be done either by private contractors or within a department of the government. In this analysis, linguistic features of the asylum seeker are used by analysts to make a determination about the speaker's nationality. The reported findings of the linguistic analysis can play a critical role in the government's decision on the refugee status of the asylum seeker.[71]

## Language documentation
Language documentationcombines anthropological inquiry (into the history and culture of language) with linguistic inquiry, in order to describe languages and their grammars.Lexicographyinvolves the documentation of words that form a vocabulary. Such a documentation of a linguistic vocabulary from a particular language is usually compiled in adictionary.Computational linguisticsis concerned with the statistical or rule-based modeling of natural language from a computational perspective. Specific knowledge of language is applied by speakers during the act of translation andinterpretation, as well as inlanguage education– the teaching of a second or foreign language. Policy makers work with governments to implement new plans in education and teaching which are based on linguistic research.[citation needed]
Since the inception of the discipline of linguistics, linguists have been concerned with describing and analysing previouslyundocumented languages. Starting withFranz Boasin the early 1900s, this became the main focus of American linguistics until the rise offormal linguisticsin the mid-20th century. This focus on language documentation was partly motivated by a concern to document the rapidlydisappearinglanguages of indigenous peoples. The ethnographic dimension of the Boasian approach to language description played a role in the development of disciplines such associolinguistics,anthropological linguistics, andlinguistic anthropology, which investigate the relations between language, culture, and society.[citation needed]
The emphasis on linguistic description and documentation has also gained prominence outside North America, with the documentation of rapidly dying indigenous languages becoming a focus in some university programs in linguistics. Language description is a work-intensive endeavour, usually requiring years of field work in the language concerned, so as to equip the linguist to write a sufficiently accurate reference grammar. Further, the task of documentation requires the linguist to collect a substantial corpus in the language in question, consisting of texts and recordings, both sound and video, which can be stored in an accessible format within open repositories, and used for further research.[72]

## Translation
The sub-field of translation includes the translation of written and spoken texts across media, from digital to print and spoken. To translate literally means to transmute the meaning from one language into another. Translators are often employed by organizations such as travel agencies and governmental embassies to facilitate communication between two speakers who do not know each other's language. Translators are also employed to work withincomputational linguisticssetups likeGoogle Translate, which is an automated program to translate words and phrases between any two or more given languages. Translation is also conducted by publishing houses, which convert works of writing from one language to another in order to reach varied audiences. Cross-national and cross-culturalsurvey researchstudies employ translation to collect comparable data among multilingual populations.[73][74]Academic translators specialize in or are familiar with various other disciplines such as technology, science, law, economics, etc.

## Clinical linguistics
Clinical linguistics is the application of linguistic theory to the field ofspeech-language pathology. Speech language pathologists work on corrective measures to treatcommunicationand swallowing disorders.

## Computational linguistics
Computational linguistics is the study of linguistic issues in a way that is "computationally responsible", i.e., taking careful note of computational consideration of algorithmic specification and computational complexity, so that the linguistic theories devised can be shown to exhibit certain desirable computational properties and their implementations. Computational linguists also work on computer language and software development.

## Evolutionary linguistics
Evolutionary linguistics is asociobiologicalapproach to analyzing the emergence of the language faculty through human evolution, and also the application of evolutionary theory to the study of cultural evolution among different languages. It is also a study of the dispersal of various languages across the globe, through movements among ancient communities.[75]

## Forensic linguistics
Forensic linguistics is the application of linguistic analysis to forensics. Forensic analysis investigates the style, language, lexical use, and other linguistic and grammatical features used in the legal context to provide evidence in courts of law. Forensic linguists have also used their expertise in the framework of criminal cases.[76][77]