## Magnetic field
Inelectromagnetism,magnetic fieldis a physical property of space that quantifies the magnetic strength at a given location. Magnetic fields deflect movingelectric charges(includingelectric currents), apply torques onmagnetsto twist them in the direction of the magnetic field, and attract or repel magnets and magnetic material such asiron. In addition, a time varying magnetic fieldinduceselectrical currents.
Magnetic fields are created by magnetic materials and by moving electric charges (including electrical current). The latter is important in creatingelectromagnets: devices that precisely control magnetic fields by changing the current through the electromagnet.
Since both strength and direction of a magnetic field may vary with location, it is described mathematically by assigning avectorto each point of space, making it avector field[note 1].
Magnetic fields are used throughout modern science and technology. Inelectrical engineeringandelectromechanicsit is important in the design and use ofelectric motors,generators,transformers, electromagnets, andinductorsamong many other devices. Inmaterial science, magnetic forces give information about the charge carriers in a material through theHall effectin addition to other uses. Ingeologyandgeophysics,Earth's magnetic fieldgives information about earth's interior while local magnetic field measurements are used inmineral explorationand other measurements. Inastronomy, magnetic fields are produced by many astronomical objects includingplanets,stars,white dwarfs,neutron stars, etc. Too, Earth's magnetic field creates amagnetospherewhich shields the Earth'sozone layerand the rest of the planet from thesolar wind. Inphysicsthe relationship between the magnetic and electric fields forms the field ofelectrodynamicswhich is important to understand a wide range of phenomena includinglight(also known aselectromagnetic radiation) and the properties ofantennaandtransmission lines.

## Description
There are two different, but closely related vector fields which are called "magnetic field". These are written asBandH.[note 2]While the best names for these fields is the subject of long running debate, the underlying physics is uncontested.[1]Historically, the term "magnetic field" was reserved forHwhile using other terms forB, but many recent textbooks use the term "magnetic field" to describeBas well as or in place ofH.[note 3]There are many alternative names for both (see sidebars in the corresponding sections).

## The B-field
Also known asmagnetic flux density, the magneticBfield is the "magnetic field" responsible for magnetic forces, magnetic torques and electromagnetic induction. Therefore, it can be defined by any equation that describes these phenomena.
For example, the magnetic field vectorBat any point can be defined as the vector field that, when used in theLorentz force law, correctly predicts the force on a moving charged particle at that point:[5][6]: 204
F=qE+q(v×B){\displaystyle \mathbf {F} =q\mathbf {E} +q(\mathbf {v} \times \mathbf {B} )}
HereFis the force on the particle,qis the particle'selectric charge,Eis the external electric field,v, is the particle'svelocity, and × denotes thecross product. The direction of force on the charge can be determined by theright-hand rule(see the figure).
In other words,[5]:173–4
[T]he command, "Measure the direction and magnitude of the vectorBat such and such a place," calls for the following operations: Take a particle of known chargeq. Measure the force onqat rest, to determineE. Then measure the force on the particle when its velocity isv; repeat withvin some other direction. Now find aBthat makes the Lorentz force law fit all these results—that is the magnetic field at the place in question.
For more details seeLorentz Forceor the#Magnetic force on a charged particlesection below.
TheSIunit ofBistesla(symbol: T).[note 4]TheGaussian-cgs unitofBis thegauss(symbol: G). (The conversion is 1 T ≘ 10000 G.[7][8]) One nanotesla corresponds to 1 gamma (symbol: γ).[8]

## The H-field
WhileBcreates magnetic forces and torques on objects and induces currents in conducting wires, it is not always easy to calculate. The main problem is thatBnecessarily includes the magnetic field induced in nearby magnetic material. It is more convenient to have a quantity that only depends on the currents that are directly controlled by the experimenter (or electrical device). This is achieved (in many cases) by defining the magneticHfield[note 5]such that:
H≡1μ0B−M,{\displaystyle \mathbf {H} \equiv {\frac {1}{\mu _{0}}}\mathbf {B} -\mathbf {M} ,}
whereμ0{\displaystyle \mu _{0}}is thevacuum permeability, andMis themagnetization vector.[6]: 269[9]: 192[10]: ch36In a vacuum,BandHare proportional to each other. Inside a material they are different (seeH and B inside and outside magnetic materials).
Defined this way,Hcan in many circumstance[note 6]be treated as if it is only due to electrical currents. While not strictly true in all cases, it is often treated this way in practice with corrections accounting forHdue to nearby magnetic material.[note 7]In any case, theB-field still needs to be calculated from theH-field if forces, torques, induced currents, or energy changes need to be calculated.
The SI unit of theH-field is theampereper metre (A/m),[11]and the Gaussian unit is theoersted(Oe).[7][5]:286

## Measurement
Instruments used to measure the local magneticB-field are known as amagnetometers. Important classes of magnetometers includeinduction magnetometers(or search-coil magnetometers) which measure only varying magnetic fields,rotating coil magnetometers,Hall effectmagnetometers,NMR magnetometers,SQUID magnetometers, andfluxgate magnetometers. The magnetic fields of distantastronomical objectsare measured through their effects on local charged particles. For instance, electrons spiraling around a field line producesynchrotron radiationthat is detectable inradio waves. The finest precision for a magnetic field measurement was attained byGravity Probe Bat5 aT(5×10−18T).[12]
TheH-field cannot be directly measured but can be inferred from the currents that create it.

## Visualization
Magnetic field can be visualized by a set ofmagnetic field lines, that follow the direction of the field at each point. The lines can be constructed by measuring the strength and direction of the magnetic field at a large number of points (or at every point in space). Then, mark each location with an short arrow (called avector) pointing in the direction of the local magnetic field. Connecting these arrows then forms a set of magnetic field lines. The direction of the magnetic field at any point is parallel to the direction of nearby field lines, and the local density of field lines can be made proportional to its strength. Magnetic field lines are likestreamlinesinfluid flow, in that they represent a continuous distribution, and a different resolution would show more or fewer lines.
An advantage of using magnetic field lines as a representation is that many laws of magnetism (and electromagnetism) can be stated completely and concisely using simple concepts such as the "number" of field lines through a surface. These concepts can then be "translated" to their mathematical form. For example, the number of field lines through a given surface is thesurface integralof the magnetic field.[5]: 237
Various phenomena "display" magnetic field lines as though the field lines were physical phenomena. For example, iron filings placed in a magnetic field form lines that correspond to "field lines".[note 8]Magnetic field "lines" are also visually displayed inpolar auroras, in whichplasmaparticle dipole interactions create visible streaks of light that line up with the local direction of Earth's magnetic field.
Field lines can be used as a qualitative tool to visualize magnetic forces. Inferromagneticsubstances likeironand in plasmas, magnetic forces can be understood by imagining that the field lines exert atension, (like a rubber band) along their length, and a pressure perpendicular to their length on neighboring field lines. "Unlike" poles of magnets attract because they are linked by many field lines; "like" poles repel because their field lines do not meet, but run parallel, pushing on each other.

## Use in Engineering
This article primarily follows the use of magnetic field as described by modern physics textbooks. In this understanding,Bis the fundamental quantity withHbeing a useful derived quantity. In engineering (and other fields where electromagnetic devices are important)[note 9], the magneticH-field (typically called 'magnetic field intensity') is of such importance as to treat it as a fundamental quantity. In this point of view, currents create the 'magnetic field'Hwhich induces a 'magnetic flux density'B. Too,His treated in practice as if it only depends on electrical currents. While strictly speaking this only works if there is only one magnetic material that fills the entire volume whereHis applied and only if that magnetic material isisotropic, this is such an important use case as to assume it to be true and introduce exceptions when needed. For example, theH-field of permanent magnets and other magnetic material that can't be ignored is calculated separately as ademagnetizing fieldalso known as astray field.

## Different unit systems
This article uses almost entirely the SI unit system. But other unit systems, most importantly theGaussianunit system (which is the most used system ofcgsunits for electromagnetism), are still being used in some disciplines, countries, and textbooks. It is important to note that the equations for each unit system can and often are different for different unit system. This article, unless stated otherwise, uses equations that are only valid for the SI unit system.

## Magnetic field of permanent magnets
Permanent magnetsare objects that produce their own persistent magnetic fields. They are made offerromagnetic[note 10]materials, such as iron andnickel, that have been magnetized. They have both a north and a south pole.
The magnetic field of permanent magnets, like all magnetized material, is created at the atomic level. The proper description of this effect involvesquantum mechanicsand evenrelativity. Fortunately, the net effect of adding up these magnetic interactions can often be calculated using much simpler models for the magnetic field created by the constituent atoms in the magnetic material. This occurs because at large enough distance (or equivalently for small enough magnets) the magnetic field of any magnetic object can be described by a single (vector) quantity, the magnetic dipole moment,m. Objects that can be modeled this way, for example atoms, are calledmagnetic dipoles. The magnetic field produced by the magnet then is the net magnetic field of these dipoles. Too, the net force on the magnet is a result of adding up the forces on the individual dipoles.
There are two simplified models for the nature of these dipoles: theAmperian loop modeland themagnetic pole model. These two models produce two different magnetic fields,BandH, respectively.
A realistic model of magnetism is more complicated than either of these models, but the Amperian loop model is generally better. The magnetic pole model, on the other hand, is incorrect about the nature of magnetism (magnetic charges do not exist) and makes incorrect prediction in certain cases. It, however, has the advantage of simplicity and (with care) can be used make correct predictions.

## Amperian loop model
In this model developed byAmpere, the elementary magnetic dipole that makes up all magnets is a sufficiently small Amperian loop with currentIand loop areaa. Such a current loop has a magnetic dipole momentmof
m=Ia,{\displaystyle \mathbf {m} =I\mathbf {a} ,}
where the direction ofmis perpendicular to the area of the loop,a, and depends on the direction of the current using the right-hand rule.
These magnetic dipoles produce a magneticB-field.
With this model, the Biot-Savart law can be used to calculate the correctB[13]while the Lorentz force law can be used to predict the correct torque[14], and force[15].

## Magnetic pole model
Unlike the amperian loop model, the magnetic pole model has no basis in physical reality.[6]: 258However its mathematical simplicity combined with the fact that it can lead to correct results, makes it useful if used correctly.
In this model, a magneticH-field is produced by fictitiousmagnetic chargesthat are spread over the surface of a magnetic pole with each magnet having both a north and a south pole having opposite 'charges'. A north pole feels a force in the direction of theH-field while the force on the south pole is opposite to theH-field. Near the north pole, therefore, allH-field lines point away from the north pole (whether inside the magnet or out) while near the south pole allH-field lines point toward the south pole (whether inside the magnet or out). TheH-field, therefore, is analogous to theelectric fieldEand, provided the equivalent 'magnetic charge' of the poles can be estimated, then all of the tools used for calculatingEcan be used to calculateH.
In the magnetic pole model, the elementary magnetic dipolemis formed by two opposite magnetic poles of pole strengthqmseparated by a small distance vectord, such thatm=qmd. The magnetic pole model predicts correctly the fieldHboth inside and outside magnetic materials, in particular the fact thatHis opposite to the magnetization fieldMinside a permanent magnet.
Since it is based on the fictitious idea of amagnetic charge density, the pole model has limitations. Magnetic poles cannot exist apart from each other as electric charges can, but always come in north–south pairs. If a magnetized object is divided in half, a new pole appears on the surface of each piece, so each has a pair of complementary poles. The magnetic pole model does not account for magnetism that is produced by electric currents, nor the inherent connection betweenangular momentumand magnetism.
The pole model usually treats magnetic charge as a mathematical abstraction, rather than a physical property of particles. However, amagnetic monopoleis a hypothetical particle (or class of particles) that physically has only one magnetic pole (either a north pole or a south pole). In other words, it would possess a "magnetic charge" analogous to an electric charge. Magnetic field lines would start or end on magnetic monopoles, so if they exist, they would give exceptions to the rule that magnetic field lines neither start nor end. Some theories (such asGrand Unified Theories) have predicted the existence of magnetic monopoles, but so far, none have been observed.

## Force between magnets
Specifying theforce between two small magnetsis quite complicated because it depends on the strength andorientationof both magnets and their distance and direction relative to each other. The force is particularly sensitive to rotations of the magnets due to magnetic torque. The force on each magnet depends on its magnetic moment and the magnetic field[note 11]of the other.
To understand the force between magnets, it is useful to examine themagnetic pole modelgiven above. In this model, theH-fieldof one magnet pushes and pulls onbothpoles of a second magnet. If thisH-field is the same at both poles of the second magnet then there is no net force on that magnet since the force is opposite for opposite poles. If, however, the magnetic field of the first magnet isnonuniform(such as theHnear one of its poles), each pole of the second magnet sees a different field and is subject to a different force. This difference in the two forces moves the magnet in the direction of increasing magnetic field and may also cause a net torque.
This is a specific example of a general rule that magnets are attracted (or repulsed depending on the orientation of the magnet) into regions of higher magnetic field. Any non-uniform magnetic field, whether caused by permanent magnets or electric currents, exerts a force on a small magnet in this way.
The details of the Amperian loop model are different and more complicated but yield the same result: that magnetic dipoles are attracted/repelled into regions of higher magnetic field. Mathematically, the force on a small magnet having a magnetic momentmdue to a magnetic fieldBis:[16]: Eq. 11.42
F=∇(m⋅B),{\displaystyle \mathbf {F} ={\boldsymbol {\nabla }}\left(\mathbf {m} \cdot \mathbf {B} \right),}
where thegradient∇is the change of the quantitym·Bper unit distance and the direction is that of maximum increase ofm·B. Thedot productm·B=mBcos(θ), wheremandBrepresent themagnitudeof themandBvectors andθis the angle between them. Ifmis in the same direction asBthen the dot product is positive and the gradient points "uphill" pulling the magnet into regions of higherB-field (more strictly largerm·B). This equation is strictly only valid for magnets of zero size, but is often a good approximation for not too large magnets. The magnetic force on larger magnets is determined by dividing them into smaller regions each having their ownmthensumming up the forces on each of these very small regions.

## Magnetic torque on permanent magnets
If two like poles of two separate magnets are brought near each other, and one of the magnets is allowed to turn, it promptly rotates to align itself with the first. In this example, the magnetic field of the stationary magnet creates amagnetic torqueon the magnet that is free to rotate. This magnetic torqueτtends to align a magnet's poles with the magnetic field lines. A compass, therefore, turns to align itself with Earth's magnetic field.
Mathematically, the torqueτon a small magnet is proportional both to the applied magnetic field and to the magnetic momentmof the magnet:
τ=m×B{\displaystyle {\boldsymbol {\tau }}=\mathbf {m} \times \mathbf {B} }
where × represents the vectorcross product. This equation includes all of the qualitative information included above. There is no torque on a magnet ifmis in the same direction as the magnetic field, since the cross product is zero for two vectors that are in the same direction. Further, all other orientations feel a torque that twists them toward the direction of magnetic field.

## Interactions with electric currents
Currents of electric charges both generate a magnetic field and feel a force due to magnetic B-fields.

## Magnetic field due to moving charges and electric currents
All moving charged particles produce magnetic fields. Movingpointcharges, such aselectrons, producecomplicated but well known magnetic fieldsthat depend on the charge, velocity, and acceleration of the particles.[17]These equations become much simpler when the moving charges form a steady state electrical current, the study of which is calledmagnetostatics.
In general, magnetic field lines formconcentriccircles around a current-carrying wire. The direction of such a magnetic field can be determined by using the "right-hand grip rule" (see figure at right). The strength of the magnetic field decreases with distance from the wire. (For an infinite length wire the strength is inversely proportional to the distance.)
Bending a current-carrying wire into a loop concentrates the magnetic field inside the loop while weakening it outside. Bending a wire into multiple closely spaced loops to form a coil or "solenoid" enhances this effect. A device so formed around an ironcoremay act as anelectromagnet, generating a strong, well-controlled magnetic field. An infinitely long cylindrical electromagnet has a uniform magnetic field inside, and no magnetic field outside. A finite length electromagnet produces a magnetic field that looks similar to that produced by a uniform permanent magnet, with its strength and polarity determined by the current flowing through the coil.
More specifically, the magnetic field generated by a steady currentI(a constant flow of electric charges, in which charge neither accumulates nor is depleted at any point)[note 12]is described by theBiot–Savart law:[18]: 224
B=μ0I4π∫wiredℓ×r^r2,H=I4π∫wiredℓ×r^r2,{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\mathbf {B} ={\frac {\mu _{0}I}{4\pi }}\int _{\mathrm {wire} }{\frac {\mathrm {d} {\boldsymbol {\ell }}\times \mathbf {\hat {r}} }{r^{2}}},\\\mathbf {H} ={\frac {I}{4\pi }}\int _{\mathrm {wire} }{\frac {\mathrm {d} {\boldsymbol {\ell }}\times \mathbf {\hat {r}} }{r^{2}}},\end{aligned}}}
where the integral sums over the wire length where vectordℓis the vectorline elementwith direction in the same sense as the currentI,μ0is themagnetic constant,ris the distance between the location ofdℓand the location where the magnetic field is calculated, andr̂is a unit vector in the direction ofr.
For example, applying the Bio-Savart law to the special case of a sufficiently long, straight wire, the magnetic field equations become:
|B|=μ02πrI,|H|=I2πr,{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}|\mathbf {B} |={\frac {\mu _{0}}{2\pi r}}I,\\|\mathbf {H} |={\frac {I}{2\pi r}},\end{aligned}}}
wherer= |r|. The direction is tangent to a circle perpendicular to the wire according to the right hand rule.[18]: 225
For other examples of using the Biot-Savart law to calculate the magnetic fields for other common current configurations see#Common formulæbelow.
A slightly more general[19][note 13]way of relating the currentI{\displaystyle I}to theB-field is throughAmpère's law:
∮B⋅dℓ=μ0Ienc,∮H⋅dℓ=Ienc,{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\oint \mathbf {B} \cdot \mathrm {d} {\boldsymbol {\ell }}=\mu _{0}I_{\mathrm {enc} },\\\oint \mathbf {H} \cdot \mathrm {d} {\boldsymbol {\ell }}=I_{\mathrm {enc} },\end{aligned}}}
where theline integralis over any arbitrary loop andIenc{\displaystyle I_{\text{enc}}}is the current enclosed by that loop. Ampère's law is always valid for steady currents and can be used to calculate theB-field for certain highly symmetric situations such as an infinite wire or an infinite solenoid.
In a modified form that accounts for time varying electric fields, Ampère's law is one of fourMaxwell's equationsthat describe electricity and magnetism.

## Magnetic force on a charged particle
Acharged particlemoving in aB-field experiences asidewaysforce that is proportional to the strength of the magnetic field, the component of the velocity that is perpendicular to the magnetic field and the charge of the particle. This force is known as theLorentz force, and is given byF=qE+qv×B,{\displaystyle \mathbf {F} =q\mathbf {E} +q\mathbf {v} \times \mathbf {B} ,}whereFis theforce,qis theelectric chargeof the particle,vis the instantaneousvelocityof the particle, andBis the magnetic field (inteslas).
The Lorentz force is always perpendicular to both the velocity of the particle and the magnetic field that created it. When a charged particle moves in a static magnetic field, it traces a helical path in which the helix axis is parallel to the magnetic field, and in which the speed of the particle remains constant. Because the magnetic force is always perpendicular to the motion, the magnetic field can do noworkon an isolated charge.[20][21]It can only do work indirectly, via the electric field generated by a changing magnetic field. It is often claimed that the magnetic force can do work to a non-elementarymagnetic dipole, or to charged particles whose motion is constrained by other forces, but this is incorrect[22]because the work in those cases is performed by the electric forces of the charges deflected by the magnetic field.

## Force on current-carrying wire
The force on a current carrying wire is similar to that of a moving charge as expected since a current carrying wire is a collection of moving charges. A current-carrying wire feels a force in the presence of a magnetic field. The Lorentz force on a macroscopic current is often referred to as theLaplace force.
Consider a conductor of lengthℓ, cross sectionA, and chargeqdue to electric currenti. If this conductor is placed in a magnetic field of magnitudeBthat makes an angleθwith the velocity of charges in the conductor, the force exerted on a single chargeqisF=qvBsin⁡θ,{\displaystyle F=qvB\sin \theta ,}so, forNcharges whereN=nℓA,{\displaystyle N=n\ell A,}the force exerted on the conductor isf=FN=qvBnℓAsin⁡θ=Biℓsin⁡θ,{\displaystyle f=FN=qvBn\ell A\sin \theta =Bi\ell \sin \theta ,}wherei=nqvA.

## Relation between H and B
The formulas derived for the magnetic field above are correct when dealing with the entire current. A magnetic material placed inside a magnetic field, though, generates its ownbound current, which can be a challenge to calculate. (This bound current is due to the sum of atomic sized current loops and thespinof the subatomic particles such as electrons that make up the material.) TheH-field as defined above helps factor out this bound current; but to see how, it helps to introduce the concept ofmagnetizationfirst.

## Magnetization
Themagnetizationvector fieldMrepresents how strongly a region of material is magnetized. It is defined as the netmagnetic dipole momentper unit volume of that region. The magnetization of a uniform magnet is therefore a material constant, equal to the magnetic momentmof the magnet divided by its volume. Since the SI unit of magnetic moment is A⋅m2, the SI unit of magnetizationMis ampere per meter, identical to that of theH-field.
The magnetizationMfield of a region points in the direction of the average magnetic dipole moment in that region. Magnetization field lines, therefore, begin near the magnetic south pole and ends near the magnetic north pole. (Magnetization does not exist outside the magnet.)
In the Amperian loop model, the magnetization is due to combining many tiny Amperian loops to form a resultant current calledbound current. This bound current, then, is the source of the magneticBfield due to the magnet. Given the definition of the magnetic dipole, the magnetization field follows a similar law to that of Ampere's law:[23]∮M⋅dℓ=Ib,{\displaystyle \oint \mathbf {M} \cdot \mathrm {d} {\boldsymbol {\ell }}=I_{\mathrm {b} },}where the integral is a line integral over any closed loop andIbis the bound current enclosed by that closed loop.
In the magnetic pole model, magnetization begins at and ends at magnetic poles. If a given region, therefore, has a net positive "magnetic pole strength" (corresponding to a north pole) then it has more magnetization field lines entering it than leaving it. Mathematically this is equivalent to:∮Sμ0M⋅dA=−qM,{\displaystyle \oint _{S}\mu _{0}\mathbf {M} \cdot \mathrm {d} \mathbf {A} =-q_{\mathrm {M} },}where the integral is a closed surface integral over the closed surfaceSandqMis the "magnetic charge" (in units ofmagnetic flux) enclosed byS. (A closed surface completely surrounds a region with no holes to let any field lines escape.) The negative sign occurs because the magnetization field moves from south to north.

## H-field and magnetic materials
In SI units, the H-field is related to the B-field byH≡Bμ0−M.{\displaystyle \mathbf {H} \ \equiv \ {\frac {\mathbf {B} }{\mu _{0}}}-\mathbf {M} .}
In terms of the H-field, Ampere's law is∮H⋅dℓ=∮(Bμ0−M)⋅dℓ=Itot−Ib=If,{\displaystyle \oint \mathbf {H} \cdot \mathrm {d} {\boldsymbol {\ell }}=\oint \left({\frac {\mathbf {B} }{\mu _{0}}}-\mathbf {M} \right)\cdot \mathrm {d} {\boldsymbol {\ell }}=I_{\mathrm {tot} }-I_{\mathrm {b} }=I_{\mathrm {f} },}whereIfrepresents the 'free current' enclosed by the loop so that the line integral ofHdoes not depend at all on the bound currents.[24]
For the differential equivalent of this equation seeMaxwell's equations. Ampere's law leads to the boundary condition(H1∥−H2∥)=Kf×n^,{\displaystyle \left(\mathbf {H_{1}^{\parallel }} -\mathbf {H_{2}^{\parallel }} \right)=\mathbf {K} _{\mathrm {f} }\times {\hat {\mathbf {n} }},}whereKfis the surface free current density and the unit normaln^{\displaystyle {\hat {\mathbf {n} }}}points in the direction from medium 2 to medium 1.[25]
Similarly, asurface integralofHover anyclosed surfaceis independent of the free currents and picks out the "magnetic charges" within that closed surface:∮Sμ0H⋅dA=∮S(B−μ0M)⋅dA=0−(−qM)=qM,{\displaystyle \oint _{S}\mu _{0}\mathbf {H} \cdot \mathrm {d} \mathbf {A} =\oint _{S}(\mathbf {B} -\mu _{0}\mathbf {M} )\cdot \mathrm {d} \mathbf {A} =0-(-q_{\mathrm {M} })=q_{\mathrm {M} },}
which does not depend on the free currents.
TheH-field, therefore, can be separated into two[note 14]independent parts:H=H0+Hd,{\displaystyle \mathbf {H} =\mathbf {H} _{0}+\mathbf {H} _{\mathrm {d} },}
whereH0is the applied magnetic field due only to the free currents andHdis thedemagnetizing fielddue only to the bound currents.
The magneticH-field, therefore, re-factors the bound current in terms of "magnetic charges". TheHfield lines loop only around "free current" and, unlike the magneticBfield, begins and ends near magnetic poles as well.

## Magnetism
Most materials respond to an appliedB-field by producing their own magnetizationMand therefore their ownB-fields. Typically, the response is weak and exists only when the magnetic field is applied. The termmagnetismdescribes how materials respond on the microscopic level to an applied magnetic field and is used to categorize the magneticphaseof a material. Materials are divided into groups based upon their magnetic behavior:
In the case of paramagnetism and diamagnetism, the magnetizationMis often proportional to the applied magnetic field such that:B=μH,{\displaystyle \mathbf {B} =\mu \mathbf {H} ,}whereμis a material dependent parameter called thepermeability. In some cases the permeability may be a second ranktensorso thatHmay not point in the same direction asB. These relations betweenBandHare examples ofconstitutive equations. However, superconductors and ferromagnets have a more complexB-to-Hrelation; seemagnetic hysteresis.

## Stored energy
Energy is needed to generate a magnetic field both to work against the electric field that a changing magnetic field creates and to change the magnetization of any material within the magnetic field. For non-dispersive materials, this same energy is released when the magnetic field is destroyed so that the energy can be modeled as being stored in the magnetic field.
For linear, non-dispersive, materials (such thatB=μHwhereμis frequency-independent), theenergy densityis:
u=B⋅H2=B⋅B2μ=μH⋅H2.{\displaystyle u={\frac {\mathbf {B} \cdot \mathbf {H} }{2}}={\frac {\mathbf {B} \cdot \mathbf {B} }{2\mu }}={\frac {\mu \mathbf {H} \cdot \mathbf {H} }{2}}.}
If there are no magnetic materials around thenμcan be replaced byμ0. The above equation cannot be used for nonlinear materials, though; a more general expression given below must be used.
In general, the incremental amount of work per unit volumeδWneeded to cause a small change of magnetic fieldδBis:
δW=H⋅δB.{\displaystyle \delta W=\mathbf {H} \cdot \delta \mathbf {B} .}
Once the relationship betweenHandBis known this equation is used to determine the work needed to reach a given magnetic state. Forhysteretic materialssuch as ferromagnets and superconductors, the work needed also depends on how the magnetic field is created. For linear non-dispersive materials, though, the general equation leads directly to the simpler energy density equation given above.

## Appearance in Maxwell's equations
Like all vector fields, a magnetic field has two important mathematical properties that relates it to itssources. (ForBthesourcesare currents and changing electric fields.) These two properties, along with the two corresponding properties of the electric field, make upMaxwell's Equations. Maxwell's Equations together with the Lorentz force law form a complete description ofclassical electrodynamicsincluding both electricity and magnetism.
The first property is thedivergenceof a vector fieldA,∇·A, which represents howA"flows" outward from a given point. As discussed above, aB-field line never starts or ends at a point but instead forms a complete loop. This is mathematically equivalent to saying that the divergence ofBis zero. (Such vector fields are calledsolenoidal vector fields.) This property is calledGauss's law for magnetismand is equivalent to the statement that there are no isolated magnetic poles ormagnetic monopoles.
The second mathematical property is called thecurl, such that∇×Arepresents howAcurls or "circulates" around a given point. The result of the curl is called a "circulation source". The equations for the curl ofBand ofEare called theAmpère–Maxwell equationandFaraday's lawrespectively.

## Gauss' law for magnetism
One important property of theB-field produced this way is that magneticB-field lines neither start nor end (mathematically,Bis asolenoidal vector field); a field line may only extend to infinity, or wrap around to form a closed curve, or follow a never-ending (possibly chaotic) path.[31]Magnetic field lines exit a magnet near its north pole and enter near its south pole, but inside the magnetB-field lines continue through the magnet from the south pole back to the north.[note 15]If aB-field line enters a magnet somewhere it has to leave somewhere else; it is not allowed to have an end point.
More formally, since all the magnetic field lines that enter any given region must also leave that region, subtracting the "number"[note 16]of field lines that enter the region from the number that exit gives identically zero. Mathematically this is equivalent toGauss's law for magnetism:∮SB⋅dA=0{\displaystyle \oint _{S}\mathbf {B} \cdot \mathrm {d} \mathbf {A} =0}where the integral is asurface integralover theclosed surfaceS(a closed surface is one that completely surrounds a region with no holes to let any field lines escape). SincedApoints outward, the dot product in the integral is positive forB-field pointing out and negative forB-field pointing in.

## Faraday's Law
A changing magnetic field, such as a magnet moving through a conducting coil, generates anelectric field(and therefore tends to drive a current in such a coil). This is known asFaraday's lawand forms the basis of manyelectrical generatorsandelectric motors. Mathematically, Faraday's law is:E=−dΦdt{\displaystyle {\mathcal {E}}=-{\frac {\mathrm {d} \Phi }{\mathrm {d} t}}}
whereE{\displaystyle {\mathcal {E}}}is theelectromotive force(orEMF, thevoltagegenerated around a closed loop) andΦis themagnetic flux—the product of the area times the magnetic fieldnormalto that area. (This definition of magnetic flux is whyBis often referred to asmagnetic flux density.)[32]: 210The negative sign represents the fact that any current generated by a changing magnetic field in a coil produces a magnetic field thatopposesthechangein the magnetic field that induced it. This phenomenon is known asLenz's law. This integral formulation of Faraday's law can be converted[note 17]into a differential form, which applies under slightly different conditions.
∇×E=−∂B∂t{\displaystyle \nabla \times \mathbf {E} =-{\frac {\partial \mathbf {B} }{\partial t}}}

## Ampère's Law and Maxwell's correction
Similar to the way that a changing magnetic field generates an electric field, a changing electric field generates a magnetic field. This fact is known asMaxwell's correction to Ampère's lawand is applied as an additive term to Ampere's law as given above. This additional term is proportional to the time rate of change of the electric flux and is similar to Faraday's law above but with a different and positive constant out front. (The electric flux through an area is proportional to the area times the perpendicular part of the electric field.)
The full law including the correction term is known as the Maxwell–Ampère equation. It is not commonly given in integral form because the effect is so small that it can typically be ignored in most cases where the integral form is used.
The Maxwell termiscritically important in the creation and propagation of electromagnetic waves. Maxwell's correction to Ampère's Law together with Faraday's law of induction describes how mutually changing electric and magnetic fields interact to sustain each other and thus to formelectromagnetic waves, such as light: a changing electric field generates a changing magnetic field, which generates a changing electric field again. These, though, are usually described using the differential form of this equation given below.
∇×B=μ0J+μ0ε0∂E∂t{\displaystyle \nabla \times \mathbf {B} =\mu _{0}\mathbf {J} +\mu _{0}\varepsilon _{0}{\frac {\partial \mathbf {E} }{\partial t}}}
whereJis the complete microscopiccurrent density, andε0is thevacuum permittivity.
As discussed above, materials respond to an applied electricEfield and an applied magneticBfield by producing their own internal "bound" charge and current distributions that contribute toEandBbut are difficult to calculate. To circumvent this problem,HandDfields are used to re-factor Maxwell's equations in terms of thefree current densityJf:
∇×H=Jf+∂D∂t{\displaystyle \nabla \times \mathbf {H} =\mathbf {J} _{\mathrm {f} }+{\frac {\partial \mathbf {D} }{\partial t}}}
These equations are not any more general than the original equations (if the "bound" charges and currents in the material are known). They also must be supplemented by the relationship betweenBandHas well as that betweenEandD. On the other hand, for simple relationships between these quantities this form of Maxwell's equations can circumvent the need to calculate the bound charges and currents.

## As different aspects of the same phenomenon
According tothe special theory of relativity, the partition of theelectromagnetic forceinto separate electric and magnetic components is not fundamental, but varies with theobservational frame of reference: An electric force perceived by one observer may be perceived by another (in a different frame of reference) as a magnetic force, or a mixture of electric and magnetic forces.
The magnetic field existing as electric field in other frames can be shown by consistency of equations obtained fromLorentz transformationof four force fromCoulomb's Lawin particle's rest frame withMaxwell's lawsconsidering definition of fields fromLorentz forceand for non accelerating condition. The form of magnetic field hence obtained byLorentz transformationoffour-forcefrom the form ofCoulomb's lawin source's initial frame is given by:[33]: 29–42
B=q4πε0r31−β2(1−β2sin2⁡θ)3/2v×rc2=v×Ec2{\displaystyle \mathbf {B} ={\frac {q}{4\pi \varepsilon _{0}r^{3}}}{\frac {1-\beta ^{2}}{(1-\beta ^{2}\sin ^{2}\theta )^{3/2}}}{\frac {\mathbf {v} \times \mathbf {r} }{c^{2}}}={\frac {\mathbf {v} \times \mathbf {E} }{c^{2}}}}
whereq{\displaystyle q}is the charge of the point source,ε0{\displaystyle \varepsilon _{0}}is thevacuum permittivity,r{\displaystyle \mathbf {r} }is the position vector from the point source to the point in space,v{\displaystyle \mathbf {v} }is the velocity vector of the charged particle,β{\displaystyle \beta }is the ratio of speed of the charged particle divided by the speed of light andθ{\displaystyle \theta }is the angle betweenr{\displaystyle \mathbf {r} }andv{\displaystyle \mathbf {v} }. This form of magnetic field can be shown to satisfy Maxwell's laws within the constraint of particle being non accelerating.[34]The above reduces toBiot-Savart lawfor non relativistic stream of current (β≪1{\displaystyle \beta \ll 1}).
Formally, special relativity combines the electric and magnetic fields into a rank-2tensor, called theelectromagnetic tensor. Changing reference framesmixesthese components. This is analogous to the way that special relativitymixesspace and time intospacetime, and mass, momentum, and energy intofour-momentum.[35]Similarly, theenergy stored in a magnetic fieldis mixed with the energy stored in an electric field in theelectromagnetic stress–energy tensor.

## Magnetic vector potential
In advanced topics such asquantum mechanicsandrelativityit is often easier to work with a potential formulation of electrodynamics rather than in terms of the electric and magnetic fields. In this representation, themagnetic vector potentialA, and theelectric scalar potentialφ, are defined usinggauge fixingsuch that:
B=∇×A,E=−∇φ−∂A∂t.{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\mathbf {B} &=\nabla \times \mathbf {A} ,\\\mathbf {E} &=-\nabla \varphi -{\frac {\partial \mathbf {A} }{\partial t}}.\end{aligned}}}
The vector potential,Agiven by this form may be interpreted as ageneralized potentialmomentumper unit charge[36]just asφis interpreted as ageneralizedpotential energyper unit charge. There are multiple choices one can make for the potential fields that satisfy the above condition. However, the choice of potentials is represented by its respective gauge condition.
Maxwell's equations when expressed in terms of the potentials inLorenz gaugecan be cast into a form that agrees withspecial relativity.[37]In relativity,Atogether withφforms afour-potentialregardless of the gauge condition, analogous to thefour-momentumthat combines the momentum and energy of a particle. Using the four potential instead of the electromagnetic tensor has the advantage of being much simpler—and it can be easily modified to work with quantum mechanics.

## Propagation of Electric and Magnetic fields
Special theory of relativityimposes the condition for events related bycause and effectto be time-like separated, that is that causal efficacy propagates no faster than light.[38]Maxwell's equationsfor electromagnetism are found to be in favor of this as electric and magnetic disturbances are found to travel at the speed of light in space. Electric and magnetic fields from classical electrodynamics obey theprinciple of localityin physics and are expressed in terms of retarded time or the time at which the cause of a measured field originated given that the influence of field travelled at speed of light. The retarded time for a point particle is given as solution of:
tr=t−|r−rs(tr)|c{\displaystyle t_{r}=\mathbf {t} -{\frac {\left|\mathbf {r} -\mathbf {r} _{s}(t_{r})\right|}{c}}}
wheretr{\textstyle t_{r}}isretarded timeor the time at which the source's contribution of the field originated,rs(t){\textstyle r_{s}(t)}is the position vector of the particle as function of time,r{\textstyle \mathbf {r} }is the point in space,t{\textstyle \mathbf {t} }is the time at which fields are measured andc{\textstyle c}is the speed of light. The equation subtracts the time taken for light to travel from particle to the point in space from the time of measurement to find time of origin of the fields. The uniqueness of solution fortr{\textstyle t_{r}}for givent{\displaystyle \mathbf {t} },r{\displaystyle \mathbf {r} }andrs(t){\displaystyle r_{s}(t)}is valid for charged particles moving slower than speed of light.[33]

## Magnetic field of arbitrary moving point charge
The solution of maxwell's equations for electric and magnetic field of a point charge is expressed in terms ofretarded timeor the time at which the particle in the past causes the field at the point, given that the influence travels across space at the speed of light.
Any arbitrary motion of point charge causes electric and magnetic fields found by solving maxwell's equations using green's function for retarded potentials and hence finding the fields to be as follows:
A(r,t)=μ0c4π[qβs(1−ns⋅βs)|r−rs|]t=tr=βs(tr)cφ(r,t){\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\mathbf {A} (\mathbf {r} ,\mathbf {t} )&={\frac {\mu _{0}c}{4\pi }}\left[{\frac {q{\boldsymbol {\beta }}_{s}}{(1-\mathbf {n} _{s}\cdot {\boldsymbol {\beta }}_{s})|\mathbf {r} -\mathbf {r} _{s}|}}\right]_{t=t_{r}}\\[1ex]&={\frac {{\boldsymbol {\beta }}_{s}(t_{r})}{c}}\varphi (\mathbf {r} ,\mathbf {t} )\end{aligned}}}B(r,t)=μ04π[qc(βs×ns)γ2(1−ns⋅βs)3|r−rs|2+qns×(ns×((ns−βs)×βs˙))(1−ns⋅βs)3|r−rs|]t=tr=ns(tr)c×E(r,t){\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}\mathbf {B} (\mathbf {r} ,\mathbf {t} )&={\frac {\mu _{0}}{4\pi }}\left[{\frac {qc({\boldsymbol {\beta }}_{s}\times \mathbf {n} _{s})}{\gamma ^{2}{\left(1-\mathbf {n} _{s}\cdot {\boldsymbol {\beta }}_{s}\right)}^{3}{\left|\mathbf {r} -\mathbf {r} _{s}\right|}^{2}}}+{\frac {q\mathbf {n} _{s}\times \left(\mathbf {n} _{s}\times \left(\left(\mathbf {n} _{s}-{\boldsymbol {\beta }}_{s}\right)\times {\dot {{\boldsymbol {\beta }}_{s}}}\right)\right)}{{\left(1-\mathbf {n} _{s}\cdot {\boldsymbol {\beta }}_{s}\right)}^{3}\left|\mathbf {r} -\mathbf {r} _{s}\right|}}\right]_{t=t_{r}}\\[1ex]&={\frac {\mathbf {n} _{s}(t_{r})}{c}}\times \mathbf {E} (\mathbf {r} ,\mathbf {t} )\end{aligned}}}
whereφ(r,t){\textstyle \varphi (\mathbf {r} ,\mathbf {t} )}andA(r,t){\textstyle \mathbf {A} (\mathbf {r} ,\mathbf {t} )}are electric scalar potential and magnetic vector potential in Lorentz gauge,q{\displaystyle q}is the charge of the point source,ns(r,t){\textstyle n_{s}(\mathbf {r} ,t)}is a unit vector pointing from charged particle to the point in space,βs(t){\textstyle {\boldsymbol {\beta }}_{s}(t)}is the velocity of the particle divided by the speed of light andγ(t){\textstyle \gamma (t)}is the correspondingLorentz factor. Hence by theprinciple of superposition, the fields of a system of charges also obeyprinciple of locality.

## Quantum electrodynamics
The classical electromagnetic field incorporated into quantum mechanics forms what is known as the semi-classical theory of radiation. However, it is not able to make experimentally observed predictions such asspontaneous emission processorLamb shiftimplying the need for quantization of fields. In modern physics, the electromagnetic field is understood to be not aclassicalfield, but rather aquantum field; it is represented not as a vector of threenumbersat each point, but as a vector of threequantum operatorsat each point. The most accurate modern description of the electromagnetic interaction (and much else) isquantum electrodynamics(QED),[39]which is incorporated into a more complete theory known as theStandard Model of particle physics.
In QED, the magnitude of the electromagnetic interactions between charged particles (and theirantiparticles) is computed usingperturbation theory. These rather complex formulas produce a remarkable pictorial representation asFeynman diagramsin whichvirtual photonsare exchanged.
Predictions of QED agree with experiments to an extremely high degree of accuracy: currently about 10−12(and limited by experimental errors); for details seeprecision tests of QED. This makes QED one of the most accurate physical theories constructed thus far.
All equations in this article are in theclassical approximation, which is less accurate than the quantum description mentioned here. However, under most everyday circumstances, the difference between the two theories is negligible.

## Earth's magnetic field
The Earth's magnetic field is produced byconvectionof a liquid iron alloy in theouter core. In adynamo process, the movements drive a feedback process in which electric currents create electric and magnetic fields that in turn act on the currents.[40]
The field at the surface of the Earth is approximately the same as if a giant bar magnet were positioned at the center of the Earth and tilted at an angle of about 11° off the rotational axis of the Earth (see the figure).[41]The north pole of a magnetic compass needle points roughly north, toward theNorth Magnetic Pole. However, because a magnetic pole is attracted to its opposite, the North Magnetic Pole is actually the south pole of the geomagnetic field. This confusion in terminology arises because the pole of a magnet is defined by the geographical direction it points.[42]
Earth's magnetic field is not constant—the strength of the field and the location of its poles vary.[43]Moreover, the poles periodically reverse their orientation in a process calledgeomagnetic reversal. Themost recent reversaloccurred 780,000 years ago.[44]

## Rotating magnetic fields
Therotating magnetic fieldis a common design principle in the operation ofalternating-current motors. A permanent magnet in such a field rotates so as to maintain its alignment with the external field.
Magnetic torque is used to driveelectric motors. In one simple motor design, a magnet is fixed to a freely rotating shaft and is subjected to a magnetic field from an array ofelectromagnets. By continuously switching the electric current through each of the electromagnets, thereby flipping the polarity of their magnetic fields, like poles are kept next to the rotor; the resultant torque is transferred to the shaft.
A rotating magnetic field can be constructed using two coils at right angles with a phase difference of 90 degrees between their AC currents. In practice,three-phasesystems are used where the three currents are equal in magnitude and have a phase difference of 120 degrees. Three similar coils at mutual geometrical angles of 120 degrees create the rotating magnetic field. The ability of the three-phase system to create a rotating field, utilized in electric motors, is one of the main reasons why three-phase systems dominate the world'selectrical powersupply systems.
Synchronous motorsuse DC-voltage-fed rotor windings, which lets the excitation of the machine be controlled—andinduction motorsuse short-circuitedrotors(instead of a magnet) following the rotating magnetic field of a multicoiledstator. The short-circuited turns of the rotor developeddy currentsinduced by the rotating field of the stator, and these currents in turn produce a torque on the rotor through the Lorentz force.
The Italian physicistGalileo Ferrarisand the Serbian-Americanelectrical engineerNikola Teslaindependently researched the use of rotating magnetic fields in electric motors. In 1888, Ferraris published his research in a paper to theRoyal Academy of SciencesinTurinand Tesla gainedU.S. patent 381,968for his work.

## Hall effect
The charge carriers of a current-carrying conductor placed in a transverse magnetic field experience a sideways Lorentz force; this results in a charge separation in a direction perpendicular to the current and to the magnetic field. The resultant voltage in that direction is proportional to the applied magnetic field. This is known as theHall effect.
TheHall effectis often used to measure the magnitude of a magnetic field. It is used as well to find the sign of the dominant charge carriers in materials such as semiconductors (negative electrons or positive holes).

## Magnetic circuits
An important use ofHis inmagnetic circuitswhereB=μHinside a linear material. Here,μis themagnetic permeabilityof the material. This result is similar in form toOhm's lawJ=σE, whereJis the current density,σis the conductance andEis the electric field. Extending this analogy, the counterpart to the macroscopic Ohm's law (I=V⁄R) is:
Φ=FRm,{\displaystyle \Phi ={\frac {F}{R}}_{\mathrm {m} },}
whereΦ=∫B⋅dA{\textstyle \Phi =\int \mathbf {B} \cdot \mathrm {d} \mathbf {A} }is the magnetic flux in the circuit,F=∫H⋅dℓ{\textstyle F=\int \mathbf {H} \cdot \mathrm {d} {\boldsymbol {\ell }}}is themagnetomotive forceapplied to the circuit, andRmis thereluctanceof the circuit. Here the reluctanceRmis a quantity similar in nature toresistancefor the flux. Using this analogy it is straightforward to calculate the magnetic flux of complicated magnetic field geometries, by using all the available techniques ofcircuit theory.

## Largest magnitude magnetic fields
As of October 2018[update], the largest magnitude magnetic field produced over a macroscopic volume outside a lab setting is 2.8 kT (VNIIEFinSarov,Russia, 1998).[45][46]As of October 2018, the largest magnitude magnetic field produced in a laboratory over a macroscopic volume was 1.2 kT by researchers at theUniversity of Tokyoin 2018.[46]The largest magnitude magnetic fields produced in a laboratory occur in particle accelerators, such asRHIC, inside the collisions of heavy ions, where microscopic fields reach 1014T.[47][48]Magnetarshave the strongest known magnetic fields of any naturally occurring object, ranging from 0.1 to 100 GT (108to 1011T).[49]

## Common formulæ
Additional magnetic field values can be found through the magnetic field of a finite beam, for example, that the magnetic field of an arc of angleθ{\displaystyle \theta }and radiusR{\displaystyle R}at the center isB=μ0θI4πR{\displaystyle B={\mu _{0}\theta I \over 4\pi R}}, or that the magnetic field at the center of a N-sided regular polygon of sidea{\displaystyle a}isB=μ0NIπasin⁡πNtan⁡πN{\displaystyle B={\mu _{0}NI \over \pi a}\sin {\pi  \over N}\tan {\pi  \over N}}, both outside of the plane with proper directions as inferred by right hand thumb rule.

## Early developments
While magnets and some properties of magnetism were known to ancient societies, the research of magnetic fields began in 1269 when French scholarPetrus Peregrinus de Maricourtmapped out the magnetic field on the surface of a spherical magnet using iron needles. Noting the resulting field lines crossed at two points he named those points "poles" in analogy to Earth's poles. He also articulated the principle that magnets always have both a north and south pole, no matter how finely one slices them.[50][note 18]
Almost three centuries later,William GilbertofColchesterreplicated Petrus Peregrinus' work and was the first to state explicitly that Earth is a magnet.[51]: 34Published in 1600, Gilbert's work,De Magnete, helped to establish magnetism as a science.

## Mathematical development
In 1750,John Michellstated that magnetic poles attract and repel in accordance with aninverse square law[51]: 56Charles-Augustin de Coulombexperimentally verified this in 1785 and stated explicitly that north and south poles cannot be separated.[51]: 59Building on this force between poles,Siméon Denis Poisson(1781–1840) created the first successful model of the magnetic field, which he presented in 1824.[51]: 64In this model, a magneticH-field is produced bymagnetic polesand magnetism is due to small pairs of north–south magnetic poles.
Three discoveries in 1820 challenged this foundation of magnetism.Hans Christian Ørsteddemonstrated that a current-carrying wire is surrounded by a circular magnetic field.[note 19][52]ThenAndré-Marie Ampèreshowed that parallel wires with currents attract one another if the currents are in the same direction and repel if they are in opposite directions.[51]: 87[53]Finally,Jean-Baptiste BiotandFélix Savartannounced empirical results about the forces that a current-carrying long, straight wire exerted on a small magnet, determining the forces were inversely proportional to the perpendicular distance from the wire to the magnet.[54][51]: 86Laplacelater deduced a law of force based on the differential action of a differential section of the wire,[54][55]which became known as theBiot–Savart law, as Laplace did not publish his findings.[56]
Extending these experiments, Ampère published his own successful model of magnetism in 1825. In it, he showed the equivalence of electrical currents to magnets[51]: 88and proposed that magnetism is due to perpetually flowing loops of current instead of the dipoles of magnetic charge in Poisson's model.[note 20]Further, Ampère derived bothAmpère's force lawdescribing the force between two currents andAmpère's law, which, like the Biot–Savart law, correctly described the magnetic field generated by a steady current. Also in this work, Ampère introduced the termelectrodynamicsto describe the relationship between electricity and magnetism.[51]: 88–92
In 1831,Michael Faradaydiscoveredelectromagnetic inductionwhen he found that a changing magnetic field generates an encircling electric field, formulating what is now known asFaraday's law of induction.[51]: 189–192Later,Franz Ernst Neumannproved that, for a moving conductor in a magnetic field, induction is a consequence of Ampère's force law.[51]: 222In the process, he introduced the magnetic vector potential, which was later shown to be equivalent to the underlying mechanism proposed by Faraday.[51]: 225
In 1850,Lord Kelvin, then known as William Thomson, distinguished between two magnetic fields now denotedHandB. The former applied to Poisson's model and the latter to Ampère's model and induction.[51]: 224Further, he derived howHandBrelate to each other and coined the termpermeability.[51]: 245[57]
Between 1861 and 1865,James Clerk Maxwelldeveloped and publishedMaxwell's equations, which explained and united all ofclassicalelectricity and magnetism. The first set of these equations was published in a paper entitledOn Physical Lines of Forcein 1861. These equations were valid but incomplete. Maxwell completed his set of equations in his later 1865 paperA Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Fieldand demonstrated the fact that light is anelectromagnetic wave.Heinrich Hertzpublished papers in 1887 and 1888 experimentally confirming this fact.[58][59]

## Modern developments
In 1887, Tesla developed aninduction motorthat ran onalternating current. The motor usedpolyphasecurrent, which generated arotating magnetic fieldto turn the motor (a principle that Tesla claimed to have conceived in 1882).[60][61][62]Tesla received a patent for his electric motor in May 1888.[63][64]In 1885,Galileo Ferrarisindependently researched rotating magnetic fields and subsequently published his research in a paper to theRoyal Academy of SciencesinTurin, just two months before Tesla was awarded his patent, in March 1888.[65]
The twentieth century showed that classical electrodynamics is already consistent with special relativity, and extended classical electrodynamics to work with quantum mechanics.Albert Einstein, in his paper of 1905 that established relativity, showed that both the electric and magnetic fields are part of the same phenomena viewed from different reference frames. Finally, the emergent field ofquantum mechanicswas merged with electrodynamics to formquantum electrodynamics, which first formalized the notion that electromagnetic field energy is quantized in the form of photons.