## Migration (ecology)
Migration, inecology, is the large-scale movement of members of a species to a differentenvironment. Migration is a natural behavior and component of thelife cycleof many species of mobile organisms, not limited to animals, thoughanimal migrationis the best known type. Migration is often cyclical, frequently occurring on aseasonalbasis, and in some cases on adaily basis.[1]Species migrate to take advantage of more favorable conditions with respect tofoodavailability, safety frompredation,matingopportunity, or other environmental factors.[2][3]
Migration is most commonly seen in the form of animal migration, the physical movement by animals from one area to another. That includesbird,fish, andinsect migration. However, plants can be said to migrate, asseed dispersalenables plants to grow in new areas, under environmental constraints such as temperature and rainfall, resulting in changes such asforest migration.

## Mechanisms
While members of some species learn a migratory route on their first journey with older members of their group, other species genetically pass on information regarding their migratory paths.[4]: 71–72Despite many differences in organisms’ migratory cues and behaviors, “considerable similarities appear to exist in the cues involved in the different phases of migration.”[4]: 84Migratory organisms use environmental cues likephotoperiodand weather conditions as well as internal cues like hormone levels to determine when it is time to begin a migration. Migratory species use senses such asmagnetoreceptionorolfactionto orient themselves or navigate their route, respectively.[4]: 69–70

## Factors
The factors that determine migration methods are variable due to the inconsistency of major seasonal changes and events. When an organism migrates from one location to another, its energy use and rate of migration are directly related to each other and to the safety of the organism. If an ecological barrier presents itself along a migrant's route, the migrant can either choose to use its energy to cross the barrier directly or use it to move around the barrier. If an organism is migrating to a place where there is high competition for food or habitat, its rate of migration should be higher. This indirectly helps determine an organism's fitness by increasing the likelihood of its survival and reproductive success.[4]: 38–41

## In animals
Animal migration is the relatively long-distance movement of individualanimals, usually on aseasonalbasis. It is the most common form of migration in ecology.[5]It is found in all major animal groups, includingbirds,[6]mammals,[7]fish,[8][9]reptiles,[10]amphibians,insects,[11]andcrustaceans.[12][13]The cause of migration may be local climate, local availability of food, the season of the year or for mating.[5]To be counted as a true migration, and not just a local dispersal or irruption, the movement of the animals should be an annual or seasonal occurrence, or a major habitat change as part of their life. An annual event could includeNorthern Hemispherebirds migrating south for the winter, orwildebeestmigrating annually for seasonal grazing. A major habitat change could include youngAtlantic salmonor sea lamprey leaving the river of their birth when they have reached a few inches in size.[5]Some traditional forms ofhuman migrationfit this pattern.[14][15]Migrations can be studied using traditional identification tags such asbird rings, or tracked directly with electronic tracking devices.[16]Before animal migration was understood, folklore explanations were formulated for the appearance and disappearance of some species, such as thatbarnacle geesegrew fromgoose barnacles.[17]

## In plants
Plants can be said to migrate, asseed dispersalenables plants to grow in new areas, under environmental constraints such as temperature and rainfall. When those constraints change, the border of a plant species's distribution may move, so the plant may be said to migrate, as for example inforest migration.[18]

## Effects
A species migrating to a new community can affect the outcome of local competitive interactions. A species that migrates to a new community can cause atop-down effectwithin the community. If the migratory species is abundant in the new community, it can become a main prey for a resident predator, leaving other resident species as only an alternate prey. This new source of food (migrants) can increase the predatory species’ population size, impacting population sizes of its other prey when the migratory species return to their original location.[4]: 136If a resident species experiences a scarcity of food due to seasonal variation, the species can decrease in population, creating an opportunity for a new species to migrate to that location as the decrease in the population of the resident species leaves an abundance of food.[4]: 135Migratory species can also transport diseases long-distance from their original habitat.[4]: 137