## Multilingualism
Multilingualismis the use of more than onelanguage, either by an individual speaker or by a group of speakers. When the languages are just two, it is usually calledbilingualism. It is believed that multilingual speakers outnumbermonolingualspeakers in theworld's population.[1][2]More than half of allEuropeansclaim to speak at least one language other than theirmother tongue,[3]but many read and write in one language. Being multilingual is advantageous for people wanting to participate in trade, globalization and cultural openness.[4]Owing to the ease of access to information facilitated by the Internet, individuals' exposure to multiple languages has become increasingly possible. People who speak several languages are also calledpolyglots.[5]
Multilingual speakers haveacquiredand maintained at least one language during childhood, the so-calledfirst language(L1). The first language (sometimes also referred to as the mother tongue) is usually acquired without formal education, bymechanismsabout which scholars disagree.[6]Children acquiring two languages natively from these early years are calledsimultaneous bilinguals. It is common for young simultaneous bilinguals to be more proficient in one language than the other.[7]
People who speak more than one language have been reported to be better at language learning when compared to monolinguals.[8]
Multilingualism in computing can be considered part of a continuum betweeninternationalization and localization. Due to the status ofEnglish in computing, software development nearly always uses it (but not in the case ofnon-English-based programming languages). Some commercial software is initially available in an English version, and multilingual versions, if any, may be produced as alternative options based on the English original.

## History
The first recorded use of the wordmultilingualin the English language occurred in the 1830s. The word is a combination ofmulti-("many") and -lingual("pertaining to languages").[9]The phenomenon of multilingualism is as old as the very existence of different languages.[10]
Today, evidence of multilingualism in an area includes things such asbilingual signs, which represent the same message in more than one language. Historical examples includeglossesin textual sources, which can provide notes in a different language from the source text;macaronic textswhich mix together two or more languages with the expectation that the reader will understand both; the existence of separate sacred and vernacular languages (such asChurch Latinvs.common forms of Latin, andHebrewvs.AramaicandJewish languages); and the frequency of linguistic borrowings and other results oflanguage contact.[11]

## Definition
The definition of multilingualism is a subject of debate in the same way as that of language fluency. At one end of the linguistic continuum, multilingualism may be defined as the mastery of more than one language. The speaker would have knowledge of and control over the languages equivalent to that of a native speaker. At the opposite end of the spectrum would be people who know enough phrases to get around as a tourist using the alternate language. Since 1992,Vivian Cookhas argued that most multilingual speakers fall somewhere between minimal and maximal definitions. Cook calls these peoplemulti-competent.[12][13]
In addition, there is no consistent definition of what constitutes a distinct language.[14]For instance, scholars often disagree whetherScotsis a language in its own right or merely a dialect ofEnglish.[15]Furthermore, what is considered a language can change, often for purely political reasons. One example is the creation ofSerbo-Croatianas astandard languageon the basis of theEastern Herzegovinian dialectto function asumbrellafor numerousSouth Slavicdialects; after the breakup ofYugoslavia, it was split intoSerbian,Croatian,BosnianandMontenegrin. Another example is the historical dismissal ofUkrainianas a Russian dialect by the Russiantsarsto discourage national feelings.[16]Many small independent nations' schoolchildren are today compelled to learn multiple languages because of international interactions.[17]For example, in Finland, all children are required to learn at least three languages: the two national languages (Finnish and Swedish) and one foreign language (usually English). Many Finnish schoolchildren also study further languages, such as German, French or Spanish.[18]
In some large nations with multiple languages, such asIndia, schoolchildren may routinely learn multiple languages based on where they reside in the country.
In many countries, bilingualism occurs through international relations, which, with English being a globallingua franca, sometimes results in majority bilingualism even when the countries in question have just one domestic official language. This occurs especially in regions such asScandinaviaand theBenelux, as well as amongGermanophones, but the phenomenon has also been expanding into some non-Germanic countries.[19]

## Acquisition
One view is that of thelinguistNoam Chomskyin what he calls the humanlanguage acquisition device—a mechanism that enables a learner to recreate correctly the rules and certain other characteristics of language used by surrounding speakers.[20]This device, according to Chomsky, wears out over time, and is not normally available bypuberty, which he uses to explain the poor results some adolescents and adults have when learning aspects of asecond language(L2).
If language learning is acognitive process, rather than a language acquisition device, as the school led byStephen Krashensuggests, there would only be relative, not categorical, differences between the two types of language learning.
Rod Ellisquotes research finding that the earlier children learn a second language, the better off they are, in terms ofpronunciation.[a]European schools generally offer secondary language classes for their students early on, due to the interconnectedness among neighboring countries with different languages. Most European students now study at least two foreign languages, a process strongly encouraged by theEuropean Union.[21]
Based on the research in Ann Fathman'sThe Relationship Between Age and Second Language Productive Ability,[22]there is a difference in the rate of learning of English morphology, syntax and phonology based upon differences in age, but the order of acquisition in second language learning does not change with age.
Insecond languageclass, students commonly face difficulties in thinking in the target language because they are influenced by their native language and cultural patterns. Robert B. Kaplan believes that in second language classes, foreign students' papers may seem out of focus because the foreign student employs rhetoric and sequences of thought that violate the expectations of the native reader.[23]Foreign students who have mastered syntactic structures have still demonstrated an inability to compose adequate themes, term papers, theses, and dissertations. Robert B. Kaplan describes two key words that affect people when they learn a second language.Logicin the popular, rather than the logician's sense of the word, is the basis of rhetoric, evolved out of a culture; it is not universal.Rhetoric, then, is not universal either, but varies from culture to culture and even from time to time within a given culture.[23]Language teachers know how to predict the differences between pronunciations or constructions in different languages, but they might be less clear about the differences between rhetoric, that is, in the way they use language to accomplish various purposes, particularly in writing.[24]
People who learn multiple languages may also experiencepositive transfer– the process by which it becomes easier to learn additional languages if thegrammarorvocabularyof the new language is similar to those of the languages already spoken. On the other hand, students may also experience negative transfer – interference from languages learned at an earlier stage of development while learning a new language later in life.[25]
Translanguagingalso supports the acquisition of new languages. It helps the development of new languages by forming connections from one language to another.

## Receptive bilingualism
Receptive bilinguals are those who can understand a second language but who cannot speak it or whose abilities to speak it are inhibited by psychological barriers. Receptive bilingualism is frequently encountered among adult immigrants to theU.S.who do not speak English as a native language but who have children who do speak English natively, usually in part because those children's education has been conducted in English; while the immigrant parents can understand both their native language and English, they speak only their native language to their children. If their children are likewise receptively bilingual but productively English-monolingual, throughout the conversation the parents will speak their native language and the children will speak English. If their children are productively bilingual, however, those children may answer in their parents' native language, in English, or in a combination of both languages, varying their choice of language depending on factors such as the communication's content, context or emotional intensity and the presence or absence of third-party speakers of one language or the other. The third alternative represents the phenomenon of "code-switching" in which the productively bilingual party to a communication switches languages in the course of that communication. Receptively bilingual persons, especially children, may rapidly achieve oral fluency by spending extended time in situations where they are required to speak the language that they theretofore understood only passively. Until both generations achieve oral fluency, not all definitions of bilingualism accurately characterize the family as a whole, but the linguistic differences between the family's generations often constitute little or no impairment to the family's functionality.[26]Receptive bilingualism in one language as exhibited by a speaker of another language, or even as exhibited by most speakers of that language, is not the same asmutual intelligibilityof languages; the latter is a property of a pair oflanguages, namely a consequence of objectively high lexical and grammatical similarities between the languages themselves (e.g., Norwegian and Swedish), whereas the former is a property of one or morepersonsand is determined by subjective or intersubjective factors such as the respective languages' prevalence in the life history (including family upbringing, educational setting, and ambient culture) of the person or persons.[27]

## Order of acquisition
Insequential bilingualism, learners receive literacy instruction in their native language until they acquire a "threshold" literacy proficiency. Some researchers use age three as the age when a child has basic communicative competence in their first language (Kessler, 1984).[28]Children may go through a process of sequential acquisition if they migrate at a young age to a country where a different language is spoken, or if the child exclusively speaks his or her heritage language at home until he or she is immersed in a school setting where instruction is offered in a different language.
Insimultaneous bilingualism, the native language and the community language are simultaneously taught. The advantage is literacy in two languages as the outcome. However, the teacher must be well-versed in both languages and also in techniques for teaching a second language.
The phases children go through during sequential acquisition are less linear than for simultaneous acquisition and can vary greatly among children. Sequential acquisition is a more complex and lengthier process, although there is no indication that non-language-delayed children end up less proficient than simultaneous bilinguals, so long as they receive adequate input in both languages.[29]
A coordinate model posits that equal time should be spent in separate instruction of the native language and the community language. The native language class, however, focuses on basic literacy while the community language class focuses on listening and speaking skills. Being bilingual does not necessarily mean that one can speak, for example, English and French.

## Outcomes
Research has found that the development of competence in the native language serves as a foundation of proficiency that can be transposed to the second language – the common underlying proficiency hypothesis.[30][31]Cummins' work sought to overcome the perception propagated in the 1960s that learning two languages made for two competing aims. The belief was that the two languages were mutually exclusive and that learning a second required unlearning elements and dynamics of the first to accommodate the second.[32]The evidence for this perspective relied on the fact that some errors in acquiring the second language were related to the rules of the first language.[32]
Another new development that has influenced the linguistic argument for bilingual literacy is the length of time necessary to acquire a second language. Previously, children were believed to have the ability to learn a language within a year, but today, researchers believe that within and across academic settings, the period is closer to five years.[33][34][needs update?]
An interesting outcome of studies during the early 1990s, however, confirmed that students who do complete bilingual instruction perform better academically.[33][34]These students exhibit morecognitive flexibility, including a better ability to analyze abstract visual patterns. Students who receive two-way bilingual immersion, a form of dual language education that brings together students from two different language backgrounds to learn in both languages,[35]will perform at an even higher level.[citation needed]Examples of such programs include international and multi-national education schools.

## In individuals
A multilingual person is someone who can communicate in more than one language actively (through speaking, writing, or signing). Multilingual people can logically speak any language they write in (aside frommutemultilingual people[36]), but they cannot necessarily write in any language they speak.[37]More specifically, bilingual and trilingual people are those in comparable situations involving two or three languages, respectively. A multilingual person is generally referred to as apolyglot, a term that may also refer to people who learn multiple languages as a hobby.[38][39]Multilingual speakers have acquired and maintained at least one language during childhood, the so-calledfirst language(L1). The first language (sometimes also referred to as the mother tongue) is acquired without formal education, by mechanisms heavily disputed. Children acquiring two languages in this way are called simultaneous bilinguals. Even in the case of simultaneous bilinguals, one language usually dominates over the other.[40]
In linguistics, first language acquisition is closely related to the concept of a "native speaker". According to a view widely held by linguists, a native speaker of a given language has in some respects a level of skill that a second (or subsequent) language learner cannot easily accomplish. Consequently, descriptive empirical studies of languages are usually carried out using only native speakers. This view is, however, slightly problematic, particularly as many non-native speakers demonstrably not only successfully engage with and in their non-native language societies, but in fact may become culturally and even linguistically important contributors (as, for example, writers, politicians, media personalities and performing artists) in their non-native language. In recent years, linguistic research has focused attention on the use of widely known world languages, such as English, as alingua francaor a shared common language of professional and commercial communities. In lingua franca situations, most speakers of the common language are functionally multilingual.
The reverse phenomenon, where people who know more than one language end up losing command of some or all of their additional languages, is calledlanguage attrition. It has been documented that, under certain conditions, individuals may lose their L1 language proficiency completely, after switching to the exclusive use of another language, and effectively "become native" in a language that was once secondary after the L1 undergoes total attrition.
This is most commonly seen amongimmigrantcommunities. The most important factor in spontaneous, total L1 loss appears to be age; in the absence of neurological dysfunction or injury, only young children typically are at risk of forgetting their native language and switching to a new one.[41]Once they pass an age that seems to correlate closely with thecritical period, around the age of 12, total loss of a native language is not typical, although it is still possible for speakers to experience diminished expressive capacity if the language is never practiced.[42]

## Cognitive ability
There is no evidence for a bilingual advantage in executive function and lexical difficulties are confined to those who learnt a second language later in life.[43]Some initial reports concluded that people who use more than one language have been reported to be more adept at language learning compared to monolinguals,[8]and this idea persisted in part due topublication bias.[44]Current meta-analyses find no effect.[45]
Individuals who are highly proficient in two or more languages have been reported to have a certain very marginally enhanced or no differentexecutive function,[46][47]and older onset fordementia.[48][49][50][51][52]More recently, however, this claim has come under strong criticism[53][54]with repeated failures to replicate.[55][56][57]Yet, many prior studies do not reliably quantify samples of bilinguals under investigation.[58]An emerging perspective is that studies on bilingual and multilingual cognitive abilities need to account for validated and granular quantifications of language experience in order to identify boundary conditions of possible cognitive effects.[59][60][61][62]

## Auditory ability
Bilingual and multilingual individuals are shown to have superior auditory processing abilities compared to monolingual individuals.[63]Several investigations have compared auditory processing abilities of monolingual and bilingual individuals using tasks such as gap detection, temporal ordering, pitch pattern recognition etc. In general, results of studies have reported superior performance among bilingual and multilingual individuals. Furthermore, among bilingual individuals, one's level of proficiency in one's second language was also reported to influence auditory processing abilities.

## Economic benefits
Bilinguals might have important labor market advantages over monolingual individuals as bilingual people can carry out duties that monolinguals cannot,[64]such as interacting with customers who only speak a minority language. A study in Switzerland has found that multilingualism is positively correlated with an individual's salary, the productivity of firms, and the gross domestic production (GDP); the authors state that Switzerland's GDP is augmented by 10% by multilingualism.[65]A study in the United States by O. Agirdag found that bilingualism has substantial economic benefits, as bilingual people were found to earn around $3,000 more per year in salary than monolinguals.[66]

## Psychology
A study in 2012 has shown that using a foreign language reduces decision-making biases. It was surmised that theframing effectdisappeared when choices are presented in a second language. As human reasoning is shaped by two distinct modes of thought: one that is systematic, analytical and cognition-intensive, and another that is fast, unconscious and emotionally charged, it was believed that a second language provides a useful cognitive distance from automatic processes, promoting analytical thought and reducing unthinking, emotional reaction. Therefore, those who speak two languages have better critical thinking and decision-making skills.[67]A study published a year later found that switching to a second language seems to exempt bilinguals from social norms and constraints, such aspolitical correctness.[68]In 2014, another study showed that people using a foreign language are more likely to make utilitarian decisions when faced with moral dilemmas, such as thetrolley problemand its variations. Participants in this study chose the utilitarian option more often in the Fat Man dilemma when it was presented in a foreign language. For the related Switch Track dilemma, however, the use of a foreign language presented no significant influence on the choices participants made. The authors of this study surmised that a foreign language lacks the emotional impact of one's native language.[69]

## Personality
Because it is difficult or impossible to master many of the high-level semantic aspects of a language (including but not limited to itsidiomsandeponyms) without first understanding the culture and history of the region in which that language evolved, as a practical matter an in-depth familiarity with multiple cultures is a prerequisite for high-level multilingualism. This knowledge of multiple cultures, both individually and comparatively, can shape an individual's sense of identity and how others perceive it.[40][70]Some studies have found that groups of multilingual individuals get higher average scores on tests for certain personality traits such as culturalempathy,open-mindednessand social initiative.[71][72]The idea oflinguistic relativity, which claims that the language people speak influences the way they see the world, can be interpreted to mean that individuals who speak multiple languages have a broader, more diverse view of the world, even when speaking only one language at a time.[73]Some bilinguals feel that their personality changes depending on which language they are speaking;[74]thus multilingualism is said to create multiple personalities. Xiao-lei Wang states in her bookGrowing up with Three Languages: Birth to Eleven: "Languages used by speakers with one or more than one language are used not just to represent a unitary self, but to enact different kinds of selves, and different linguistic contexts create different kinds of self-expression and experiences for the same person."[75]However, there has been little rigorous research done on this topic and it is difficult to define "personality" in this context.François Grosjeanwrote: "What is seen as a change in personality is most probably simply a shift in attitudes and behaviors that correspond to a shift in situation or context, independent of language."[76]However, theSapir–Whorfhypothesis, which states that a language shapes our vision of the world, may suggest that a language learned by a grown-up may have much fewer emotionalconnotationsand therefore allow a more serene discussion than a language learned by a child and to that respect more or less bound to a child's perception of the world.

## Hyperpolyglots and savants
Many polyglots know up to five or six languages, but the frequency of polyglotism drops off sharply past this point.[77][39]Those who know more languages than five or six—Michael Erardsuggests eleven or more, while Usman W. Chohan suggests six to eight (depending on proficiency) or more—are sometimes classed ashyperpolyglots.[78][77][79]Giuseppe Caspar Mezzofanti, for example, was an Italian priest reputed to have spoken anywhere from 30 to 72 languages.[39][79]
The termsavant, in a general sense, may refer to any individual with a natural or innate talent for a particular field; however, people diagnosed withsavant syndromeare specifically individuals with significant mental disabilities who demonstrate certain profound andprodigiouscapacities or certain abilities far in excess of what would usually be considered normal,[80][81]occasionally including a prodigious capacity for languages. Savant syndrome is almost always associated with an increased memory capacity of some sort, which can, for certain savants, aid in storing and retrieving knowledge of different languages.[82]In 1991, for example, linguistsNeil SmithandIanthi-Maria Tsimplidescribed a man, named Christopher, who learned sixteen languages even with a non-verbalIQbetween 40 and 70. Christopher was born in 1962, and he was diagnosed with brain damage approximately six months after his birth.[83]Despite being institutionalized because he was unable to take care of himself, Christopher had a verbal IQ of 89, could speak English with no impairment, and could learn subsequent languages with apparent ease. This facility with language and communication is considered to be unusual for most diagnosed with savant syndrome.[84]

## Neuroscience
Neuroscience of multilingualismis the study of multilingualism within the field ofneurology. These studies include the representation of different language systems in the brain, the effects of multilingualism on thebrain's structural plasticity,aphasiain multilingual individuals, andbimodal bilinguals(people who can speak at least onesign languageand at least one oral language). Neurological studies of multilingualism are carried out withfunctional neuroimaging,[85]electrophysiology, and through observation of people who have sufferedbrain damage.
The brain contains areas that are specialized to deal with language, located in theperisylvian cortexof the left hemisphere. These areas are crucial for performing language tasks, but they are not the only areas that are used; disparate parts of both the right and left brain hemispheres are active during language production. In multilingual individuals, there is a great deal of similarity in the brain areas used for each of their languages. Insights into the neurology of multilingualism have been gained by the study of multilingual individuals with aphasia, or the loss of one or more languages as a result of brain damage. Bilingual aphasics can show several different patterns of recovery; they may recover one language but not another, they may recover both languages simultaneously, or they may involuntarily mix different languages during language production during the recovery period. These patterns are explained by thedynamic viewof bilingual aphasia, which holds that the language system of representation and control is compromised as a result of brain damage.
Research has also been carried out into the neurology of bimodal bilinguals, or people who can speak at least one oral language and at least one sign language. Studies with bimodal bilinguals have also provided insight into thetip of the tonguephenomenon,working memory, and patterns of neural activity when recognizingfacial expressions, signing, and speaking.

## In communities
Widespread multilingualism is one form oflanguage contact. Multilingualism was common in the past: in early times, when most people were members of small language communities, it was necessary to know two or more languages for trade or any other dealings outside one's town or village, and this holds good today in places of high linguistic diversity such asSub-Saharan AfricaandIndia. Linguist Ekkehard Wolff estimates that 50% of the population of Africa is multilingual.[86]
In multilingual societies, not all speakers need to be multilingual. Some states can have multilingual policies and recognize several official languages, such asCanada(English and French). In some states, particular languages may be associated with particular regions in the state (e.g., Canada) or with particular ethnicities (e.g., Malaysia and Singapore). When all speakers are multilingual, linguists classify the community according to the functional distribution of the languages involved:
Note that the terms given above all refer to situations describing only two languages. In cases of an unspecified number of languages, the termspolyglossia,omnilingualism, andmultipart-lingualismare more appropriate.
Taxell's paradoxrefers to the notion that monolingual solutions are essential to the realization of functional bilingualism, with multilingual solutions ultimately leading to monolingualism. The theory is based on the observation of theSwedishlanguage inFinlandin environments such as schools is subordinated to the majority languageFinnishfor practical and social reasons, despite the positive characteristics associated with mutual language learning.[88][89]

## Interaction between speakers of different languages
Whenever two people meet, negotiations take place. If they want to express solidarity and sympathy, they tend to seek common features in their behavior. If speakers wish to express distance towards or even dislike of the person they are speaking to, the reverse is true, and differences are sought. This mechanism also extends to language, as described by thecommunication accommodation theory.
Some multilingual people usecode-switching, which involves swapping between languages. In many cases, code-switching allows speakers to participate in more than one cultural group or environment. Code-switching may also function as a strategy where proficiency is lacking. Such strategies are common if the vocabulary of one of the languages is not very elaborated for certain fields, or if the speakers have not developed proficiency in certain lexical domains, as in the case of immigrant languages.
This code-switching appears in many forms. If a speaker has a positive attitude towards both languages and towards code-switching, many switches can be found, even within the same sentence.[90]If however, the speaker is reluctant to use code-switching, as in the case of a lack of proficiency, he might knowingly or unknowingly try to camouflage his attempt by converting elements of one language into elements of the other language throughcalquing. This results in speakers using terms likecourrier noir(literally, mail that is black) in French, instead of the proper word forblackmailin French,chantage.
Sometimespidginsdevelop. A pidgin is a fusion of two or more languages that is grammatically simplified but can be understood by native speakers of any of the original languages. Some pidgins develop into "real"creole languages(such asPapiamentoinCuraçaoorSinglishinSingapore), while others simply evolve intoslangsorjargons(such asHelsinki slang, which remains more or lessmutually intelligiblewith standard Finnish and Swedish).[clarification needed]In other cases, prolonged influence of languages on each other may have the effect of changing one or both of them to the point a new, non-creole language is born. For example, many linguists believe that theOccitan languageand theCatalan languagewere formed because a population speaking a single Occitano-Romance language was divided by the political spheres of influence of France and Spain, respectively.Yiddishis a complex blend ofMiddle High GermanwithHebrewand also has borrowings from Slavic languages.
Bilingual interaction can even take place without speakers switching between languages or fusing them together. In certain areas, it is not uncommon for speakers to use a different language within the same conversation. This phenomenon is found, amongst other places, inScandinavia. Most speakers ofSwedish,NorwegianandDanishcan communicate with each other speaking their respective languages, while few can speak both (people used to these situations often adjust their language, avoiding words that are not found in the other language or that can be misunderstood). Using different languages is usually callednon-convergent discourse, a term introduced by theDutchlinguist Reitze Jonkman.[citation needed]To a certain extent, this situation also exists betweenDutchandAfrikaans, although everyday contact is fairly rare because of the distance between the two respective communities. Another example is the former state ofCzechoslovakia, where two closely related and mutually intelligible languages (CzechandSlovak) were in common use. Most Czechs and Slovaks understand both languages, although they would use only one of them (their respective mother tongue) when speaking. For example, in Czechoslovakia, it was common to hear two people talking on television each speaking a different language without any difficulty understanding each other. This bilingualism still exists nowadays, although it has started to deteriorate since Czechoslovakia split up.[91]

## Artificial Languages
Computer programs are written using artificial languages known asProgramming Languages. A computer programmer capable of reading and writing software in a multiple languages can also be called apolyglot.[92]

## Natural Languages
With emerging markets and expanding international cooperation, business users expect to be able to use software and applications in their own language.[93]Multilingualisation (or "m17n", where "17" stands for 17 omitted letters) of computer systems can be considered part of a continuum betweeninternationalization and localization:
Translating the user interface is usually part of thesoftware localizationprocess, which also includes adaptations such as units and date conversion. Many software applications are available in several languages, ranging from a handful (themost spoken languages) to dozens for the most popular applications (such asoffice suites,web browsers, etc.). Due to the status ofEnglish in computing, software development nearly always uses it (but see alsoNon-English-based programming languages), so almost all commercial software is initially available in an English version, and multilingual versions, if any, may be produced as alternative options based on the English original.
The Multilingual App Toolkit (MAT)[94]was first released in concert with the release of Windows 8 as a way to provide developers a set of free tooling that enabled adding languages to their apps with just a few clicks, in large part due to the integration of a free, unlimited license to both the Microsoft Translator machine translation service and the Microsoft Language Platform service, along with platform extensibility to enable anyone to add translation services into MAT. Microsoft engineers and inventors of MAT Jan A. Nelson and Camerum Lerum have continued to drive the development of the tools, working with third parties and standards bodies to ensure that broad availability of multilingual app development is provided.[95]With the release of Windows 10, MAT is now delivering support for cross-platform development for Universal Windows Platform apps as well as for iOS and Android apps.

## English-speaking countries
According to Hewitt (2008)[full citation needed]entrepreneurs in London from Poland, China, and Turkey tend to use English for communication with customers, suppliers, and banks but their native languages for work tasks and other social purposes. Even in English-speaking countries, immigrants can often still use their mother tongue in the workplace thanks to the presence of other immigrants in that workplace who come from the same place. Kovacs (2004) describes this phenomenon in Australia with Finnish immigrants in the construction industry who spoke Finnish during working hours.[96]Although foreign languages may be used in the workplace, English is still a key working skill.

## Asia
Many Asian companies, due to increasing globalization, have recently been focusing more and more on their employees' English proficiency. Especially inSouth Koreasince the 1990s, Asian companies have lately used different English language tests to evaluate job applicants, and the standards for these tests continue to be raised. Meanwhile,Japanranks 53rd out of 100 countries in 2019EF English Proficiency Index, amid calls for this to improve in time for the2020 Tokyo Olympics.[citation needed][needs update]
Within multiracial countries such asMalaysiaandSingapore, it is not unusual for one to speak two or more languages, albeit with varying degrees of fluency.[97][98][99]Some are proficient in several Chinese varieties, given the linguistic diversity of the ethnic Chinese community in both countries. In Singapore, bilingualism is embraced in the education system with English as the medium of instruction and the officialmother tonguetaught as a second language.[100]

## Africa
In Africa, knowledge of English is important not only for multinational companies but also in the fields of engineering, chemistry, electricity and aeronautics. A study directed by Hill and van Zyl (2002) shows that in South Africa young black engineers used English most often for communication and documentation. However, Afrikaans and other local languages were also used to explain particular concepts to workers in order to ensure understanding and cooperation.[101]

## Europe
Languages that are used in multiple countries include:
English is a commonly taught second language at schools, so it is also the most common choice for two speakers, whose native languages are different. However, some languages are so close to each other that it is generally more common when meeting to use their mother tongue rather than English. These language groups include:
In multilingual countries such as Belgium (Dutch, French, and German), Finland (Finnish and Swedish), Switzerland (German, French, Italian, and Romansh), Luxembourg (Luxembourgish, French, and German), Spain (Spanish, Catalan, Basque, and Galician), and Malta (Maltese, English, and Italian), it is common to see people who have mastered two or even three of their country's chief languages.
Many minorRussianethnic groups, such asTatars,Bashkirsand others, are also multilingual. Moreover, with the beginning of the compulsory study of theTatar languageinTatarstan, there has been an increase in knowledge of Tatar among the natively Russian-speaking population of the republic.[102]
Continued globaldiversityhas led to an increasingly multilingual population. Europe has become an excellent model to observe this newly diversified culture. The expansion of the European Union with its open labour market has provided opportunities both for well-trained professionals and unskilled workers to move to new countries to seek employment. Political changes and turmoil have also led to migration and the creation of new and more complex multilingual workplaces. In most wealthy and secure countries, immigrants are found mostly in low-paid jobs but also, increasingly, in high-status positions.[103]

## United States
English is the official language of the United States.[104]According to the US census, there are 76 million multilingual people, 23% of the population. In March 2025 the White House released an executive order declaring, “...it is in America’s best interest for the Federal Government to designate one — and only one — official language” (The White House). In 2021 there were 5.3 million students receiving English Language Learner services[1]. Additionally, Net immigration rates have drastically increased since 2021 from 247,000 to 2.8 million in 2024 (US census).

## Music
It is extremely common for music to be written in whatever the contemporarylingua francais. If a song is not written in a common tongue, then it is usually written in whatever is the predominant language in the musician's country of origin, or in another widely recognized language, such as English, German, Spanish, or French.[105]
The bilingual song cycles "there..." and "Sing, Poetry" on the 2011 contemporary classical albumTroikaconsist of musical settings of Russian poems with their English self-translation byJoseph BrodskyandVladimir Nabokov, respectively.[106]
Songs with lyrics in multiple languages are known asmacaronic verse.[107]

## Fiction
Multilingual stories, essays, and novels are often written by immigrants andsecond generation Americanauthors.[108][109]ChicanaauthorGloria E. Anzaldúa, a major figure in the fieldsThird World Feminism,Postcolonial Feminism, andLatino philosophyexplained the author's existential sense of obligation to write multilingual literature.[110]An often quoted passage, from her collection of stories and essays entitledBorderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestiza, states:
"Until I am free to write bilingually and to switch codes without having always to translate, while I still have to speak English or Spanish when I would rather speak Spanglish, and as long as I have to accommodate the English speakers rather than having them accommodate me, my tongue will be illegitimate. I will no longer be made to feel ashamed of existing. I will have my voice: Indian, Spanish, white. I will have my serpent's tongue – my woman's voice, my sexual voice, my poet's voice. I will overcome the tradition of silence".[111]
Multilingual novels byChimamanda Ngozi Adichiedisplay phrases inIgbowith translations, as in her early worksPurple HibiscusandHalf of a Yellow Sun. However, in her later novelAmericanah, the author does not offer translations of non-English passages.[111]The House on Mango StreetbySandra Cisnerosis an example ofChicano literaturethat leaves Spanish words and phrases untranslated (though italicized) throughout the text.[112]
American novelists who use foreign languages (outside of their own cultural heritage) for literary effect includeCormac McCarthy, who uses untranslated Spanish andSpanglishin his fiction.[113]

## Poetry
Multilingual poetry is prevalent in the United States'Latino literature, wherecode-switchingandtranslanguagingbetween English, Spanish, andSpanglishis common within a single poem or throughout a book of poems.[114]Latino poetryis also written in Portuguese and can include phrases inNahuatl,Mayan,Huichol,Arawakan, and other indigenous languages related to the Latino experience. Contemporary multilingual Latino American poets includeGiannina Braschi,Ana Castillo,Sandra Cisneros, andGuillermo Gómez-Peña.[115]
The British-Cuban political activist,surrealistpoet and artistMary Stanley Lowpublished the trilingual poetry volumeTres voces – Three Voices – Trois Voisin 1957, which featured poetry in English, Spanish and French.[116]

## Film
The 2021 Indian documentary filmDreaming of Wordstraces the life and work ofNjattyela Sreedharan, a fourth standard drop-out, who compiled a multilingual dictionary connecting four majorDravidian languages:Malayalam,Kannada,TamilandTelugu.[117][118][119]Travelling across four states and doing extensive research, he spent twenty five years[120]making this multilingual dictionary.

## Television
In1899, only in the English audio track, the characters, who are played by actors of different nationalities, speak in their original languages, with a total of 8 languages being broadcast.[121]