## Nomad
Nomadsare communities without fixed habitation who regularly move to and from areas. Such groups includehunter-gatherers,pastoral nomads(owninglivestock),tinkersandtradernomads.[1][2]In the twentieth century, the population of nomadic pastoral tribes slowly decreased, reaching an estimated 30–40 million nomads in the world as of 1995[update].[3]
Nomadic hunting and gathering—following seasonally available wild plants and game—is by far the oldest human subsistence method known.[4]Pastoralists raise herds of domesticated livestock, driving or accompanying them in patterns that normally avoid depleting pastures beyond their ability to recover.[5]Nomadism is also alifestyleadapted to infertile regions such assteppe,tundra, orice and sand, where mobility is the most efficient strategy for exploiting scarce resources. For example, many groups living in the tundra arereindeer herdersand are semi-nomadic, following forage for their animals.
Sometimes also described as "nomadic" are variousitinerantpopulations who move among densely populated areas to offer specialized services (craftsortrades) to their residents—externalconsultants, for example. These groups are known as "peripatetic nomads".[6][7]

## Etymology
The English wordnomadcomes from theMiddle Frenchnomade, fromLatinnomas("wandering shepherd"), fromAncient Greekνομᾰ́ς(nomás, "roaming, wandering, esp. to find pasture"), which is derived from theAncient Greekνομός(nomós, "pasture").[8][dubious–discuss]

## Common characteristics
Nomadsare communities who move from place to place as a way of obtaining food, finding pasture for livestock, or otherwise making a living. Most nomadic groups follow a fixed annual or seasonal pattern of movements and settlements. Nomadic people traditionally travel by animal, canoe, sleigh, or on foot. Animals include camels, horses, dogs, and alpaca. Today, some nomads travel by motor vehicle. Some nomads may live in homes or homeless shelters, though this would necessarily be on a temporary or itinerant basis.[citation needed]
Nomads keep moving for different reasons. Nomadic foragers move in search of game, edible plants, and water.Aboriginal Australians,Negritosof Southeast Asia, andSanof Africa, for example, traditionally move from camp to camp to hunt and gather wild plants. Some tribes of the Americas followed this way of life. Pastoral nomads, on the other hand, make their living raising livestock such as camels, cattle, goats, horses, sheep, or yaks; these nomads usually travel in search of pastures for their flocks. TheFulaniand their cattle travel through the grasslands ofNigerin western Africa. Some nomadic peoples, especially herders, may also move to raid settled communities or to avoid enemies. Nomadic craftworkers and merchants travel to find and serve customers. They include theGadia Loharblacksmiths of India, the Roma traders, Scottish travellers and Irish travellers.[citation needed]
Many nomadic and pastorally nomadic peoples are associated withsemi-aridanddesert climates; examples include theMongolicandTurkicpeoples ofCentral Asia, thePlains Indiansof theGreat Plains, and theAmazighand other peoples of theSahara Desert. Pastoral nomads who are residents of arid climates include theFulaniof theSahel, theKhoikhoiofSouth AfricaandNamibia, groups ofNortheast Africasuch asSomalisandOromo, and theBedouinof the Middle East.
Most nomads travel in groups of families, bands, ortribes. These groups are based on kinship and marriage ties or on formal agreements of cooperation. A council of adult males makes most of the decisions, though some tribes have chiefs.[citation needed]
In the case of Mongolian nomads, a family moves twice a year. These two movements generally occur during the summer and winter. The winter destination is usually located near the mountains in a valley and most families already have fixed winter locations. Their winter locations have shelter for animals and are not used by other families while they are out. In the summer they move to a more open area in which the animals can graze. Most nomads usually move within the same region and do not travel very far. Since they usually circle around a large area, communities form and families generally know where the other ones are. Often, families do not have the resources to move from one province to another unless they are moving out of the area permanently. A family can move on its own or with others; if it moves alone, they are usually no more than a couple of kilometres from each other. The geographical closeness of families is usually for mutual support. Pastoral nomad societies usually do not have large populations.
One nomadic society, theMongols, gave rise to the largest land empire in history. The Mongols originally consisted of loosely organized nomadic tribes in Mongolia, Manchuria, and Siberia. In the late 12th century,Genghis Khanunited them and other nomadic tribes to found theMongol Empire, which eventually stretched the length of Asia.[9]
The nomadic way of life has become increasingly rare. Many countries have converted pastures into cropland and forced nomadic peoples into permanent settlements.[10]
Modern forms of nomadic peoples are variously referred to as "shiftless", "gypsies", "rootless cosmopolitans", hunter-gatherers, refugees and urbanhomelessorstreet-people, depending on their individual circumstances. These terms may be used in a derogatory sense.
According toGérard Chaliand,terrorismoriginated in nomad-warrior cultures. He points toMachiavelli's classification of war into two types, which Chaliand interprets as describing a difference between warfare in sedentary and nomadic societies:[11]
There are two different kinds of war. The one springs from the ambition of princes or republics that seek to extend their empire; such were the wars ofAlexander the Great, and those ofthe Romans, and those which two hostile powers carry on against each other. These wars are dangerous but never go so far as to drive all its inhabitants out of a province, because the conqueror is satisfied with the submission of the people... The other kind of war is when an entire people, constrained by famine or war, leave their country with their families for the purpose of seeking a new home in a new country, not for the purpose of subjecting it to their dominion as in the first case, but with the intention of taking absolute possession of it themselves and driving out or killing its original inhabitants.
Primary historical sources fornomadic steppe-style warfareare found in many languages: Chinese, Persian, Polish, Russian, Classical Greek, Armenian, Latin and Arabic. These sources concern both the truesteppe nomads(Mongols,Huns,MagyarsandScythians) and also the semi-settled people likeTurks,Crimean TatarsandRussians, who retained or, in some cases, adopted the nomadic form of warfare.[12]

## Hunter-gatherers
Hunter-gatherers (also known as foragers) move from campsite to campsite, followinggameand wildfruitsandvegetables. Hunting and gathering describes early peoples' subsistence living style. Following the development of agriculture, most hunter-gatherers were eventually either displaced or converted to farming or pastoralist groups. Only a few contemporary societies, such as thePygmies, theHadza people, and someuncontacted tribesin theAmazon rainforest, are classified as hunter-gatherers; some of these societies supplement, sometimes extensively, their foraging activity with farming or animal husbandry.

## Pastoralism
Pastoral nomadsare nomads moving from pastures to pastures. Nomadicpastoralismis thought to have developed in three stages that accompaniedpopulation growthand an increase in the complexity ofsocial organization.Karim Sadrhas proposed the following stages:[14]
The pastoralists are sedentary to a certain area, as they move between the permanent spring, summer, autumn and winter (or dry and wet season) pastures for theirlivestock. The nomads moved depending on the availability of resources.[15]

## Origins
Nomadic pastoralism seems to have developed first as a part of thesecondary-products revolutionproposed byAndrew Sherratt, in which earlypre-pottery Neolithiccultures that had used animals as live meat ("on the hoof") also began using animals for their secondary products, for example:milkand its associateddairy products,wooland other animal hair, hides (and consequentlyleather),manure(forfuelandfertilizer), and traction.[citation needed]
The first nomadic pastoral society developed in the period from 8,500 to 6,500 BCE in the area of the southernLevant.[16]There, during a period of increasing aridity,Pre-Pottery Neolithic B(PPNB) cultures in theSinaiwere replaced by a nomadic, pastoral pottery-using culture, which seems to have been a cultural fusion between them and a newly-arrivedMesolithicpeople from Egypt (theHarifianculture), adopting their nomadic hunting lifestyle to the raising of stock.[17]
This lifestyle quickly developed into what Jaris Yurins has called the circum-Arabiannomadic pastoral techno-complex and is possibly associated with the appearance ofSemitic languagesin the region of theAncient Near East. The rapid spread of such nomadic pastoralism was typical of such later developments as of theYamnayaculture of thehorse and cattle nomads of the Eurasian steppe(c.3300–2600 BCE), and of theMongolspread in the laterMiddle Ages.[17]
Yamnayasteppe pastoralistsfrom thePontic–Caspian steppe, who were among the first to masterhorseback riding, played a key role inIndo-European migrationsand in the spread ofIndo-European languagesacross Eurasia.[18][19]
Trekboersin southern Africa adopted nomadism from the 17th century.[20]Some elements ofgauchoculture in colonial South America also re-invented nomadic lifestyles.[21]

## Increase in post-Soviet Central Asia
One of the results of thebreak-up of the Soviet Unionand the subsequent political independence and economic collapse of itsCentral Asianrepublics has been the resurgence of pastoral nomadism.[22]Taking theKyrgyz peopleas a representative example, nomadism was the centre of their economy before Russian colonization at the turn of the 20th century[23], when they were settled into agricultural villages. The population became increasinglyurbanizedafter World War II, but some people still take their herds of horses and cows to high pastures (jailoo) every summer, continuing a pattern oftranshumance.[citation needed]
Since the 1990s, as the cash economy shrank, unemployed relatives were reabsorbed into family farms, and the importance of this form of nomadism has increased.[citation needed]The symbols of nomadism, specifically the crown of the grey felt tent known as theyurt, appears on the national flag, emphasizing the central importance of nomadism in the genesis of the modern nation ofKyrgyzstan.[24]

## Sedentarization
From 1920 to 2008, the population of nomadic pastoral tribes slowly decreased from over a quarter ofIran's population.[25]Tribal pastures were nationalized during the 1960s. The National Commission ofUNESCOregistered the population of Iran at 21 million in 1963, of whom two million (9.5%) were nomads.[26]Although the nomadic population of Iran has dramatically decreased in the 20th century, Iran still has one of the largest nomadic populations in the world, an estimated 1.5 million in a country of about 70 million.[27]
InKazakhstanwhere the major agricultural activity was nomadic herding,[28]forced collectivizationunderJoseph Stalin's rule met with massive resistance and major losses and confiscation of livestock.[29]Livestock in Kazakhstan fell from 7 million cattle to 1.6 million and from 22 million sheep to 1.7 million. The resultingfamine of 1931–1934caused some 1.5 million deaths: this represents more than 40% of the totalKazakhpopulation at that time.[30]
In the 1950s as well as the 1960s, large numbers ofBedouinthroughout the Middle East started to leave the traditional, nomadic life to settle in the cities of the Middle East, especially as home ranges have shrunk and population levels have grown. Government policies inEgyptandIsrael, oil production inLibyaand thePersian Gulf, as well as a desire for improved standards of living, effectively led most Bedouin to become settled citizens of various nations, rather than stateless nomadic herders. A century ago, nomadic Bedouin still made up some 10% of the totalArabpopulation. Today, they account for some 1% of the total.[31]
At independence in 1960,Mauritaniawas essentially a nomadic society. The greatSahel droughtsof the early 1970s caused massive problems in a country where 85% of its inhabitants were nomadic herders. Today only 15% remain nomads.[32]
InIreland, historicallyIrish Travellersfamilies practiced seasonal nomadism, with 92% residing in tents or horse-drawn wagons as recent as 1960, often traveling in dispersed, small groups between March and November. Rapid modernization and laws targeting the "itinerant problem" saw this lifestyle decline to 27% by 1971 and 4% by 1981, with most families transitioning to urban, sedentary housing. Current housing, as of today includes roadside/vacant lots (40%), public housing (36%), and government-provided sites (25%).[33]
As many as 2 million nomadicKuchiswandered overAfghanistanin the years before theSoviet invasion, and most experts agreed that by 2000 the number had fallen dramatically, perhaps by half. A severedroughthad destroyed 80% of the livestock in some areas.[34]
Nigerexperienced a seriousfood crisis in 2005following erratic rainfall anddesert locustinvasions. Nomads such as theTuaregandFulani, who make up about 20% of Niger's 12.9 million population, had been so badly hit by the Niger food crisis that their already fragile way of life is at risk.[35]Nomads inMaliwere also affected.[36]The Fulani of West Africa are the world's largest nomadic group.[37]

## Lifestyle
Pala nomads living inWestern Tibethave a diet that is unusual in that they consume very few vegetables and no fruit. The main staple of their diet istsampaand they drinkTibetanstylebutter tea. Pala will eat heartier foods in the winter months to help keep warm. Some of the customary restrictions they explain as cultural saying only thatdrokhado not eat certain foods, even some that may be naturally abundant. Though they live near sources offishandfowlthese do not play a significant role in their diet, and they do not eatcarnivorousanimals,rabbitsor the wild asses that are abundant in the environs, classifying the latter ashorsedue to their cloven hooves. Some families do not eat until after the morning milking, while others may have a light meal with butter tea andtsampa. In the afternoon, after the morning milking, the families gather and share a communal meal of tea,tsampaand sometimesyogurt. During winter months the meal is more substantial and includes meat.Herderswill eat before leaving the camp and most do not eat again until they return to camp for the evening meal. The typical evening meal may include thin stew withtsampa, animal fat and driedradish. Winter stew would include a lot of meat with eithertsampaor boiled flourdumplings.[38]
Nomadic diets inKazakhstanhave not changed much over centuries. The Kazakh nomad cuisine is simple and includes meat, salads, marinated vegetables and fried and bakedbreads.Teais served in bowls, possibly with sugar ormilk. Milk and otherdairyproducts, likecheeseandyogurt, are especially important.Kumysis a drink offermentedmilk.Wrestlingis a popular sport, but the nomadic people do not have much time for leisure. Horse riding is a valued skill in their culture.[39]

## Perception
Ann Marie Kroll Lerner states that the pastoral nomads were viewed as "invading, destructive, and altogether antithetical to civilizing, sedentary societies" during the late-19th and early-20th centuries. According to Lerner, they are rarely accredited as "a civilizing force".[40]
Allan Hilland Sara Randall observe that western authors have looked for "romance and mystery, as well as the repository of laudable characteristics believed lost in the West, such as independence, stoicism in the face of physical adversity, and a strong sense of loyalty to family and to tribe" in nomadic pastoralist societies. Hill and Randall observe that nomadic pastoralists are stereotypically seen by the settled populace in Africa andMiddle Eastas "aimless wanderers, immoral, promiscuous and disease-ridden" peoples. According to Hill and Randall, both of these perceptions "misrepresent the reality".[41]
The development of "nomadology" byDeleuze and Guattariemphasises a positive view of features of nomadism.[42]

## Contemporary peripatetic minorities in Eurasia
Peripatetic minorities are mobile populations moving among settled populations offering acraftortrade.[43]
Each existing community is primarily endogamous, and subsists traditionally on a variety of commercial or service activities. Formerly, all or a majority of their members were itinerant, and this largely holds true today. Migration generally takes place within the political boundaries of a single state these days.
Each of the peripatetic communities is multilingual, it speaks one or more of the languages spoken by the local sedentary populations, and, additionally, within each group, a separate dialect or language is spoken. They are speaking languages ofIndicorigin and many are structured somewhat like anargotor secret language, with vocabularies drawn from various languages. There are indications that in northern Iran at least one community speaksRomani language, and some groups in Turkey also speak Romani.

## Dom people
In Afghanistan, the Nausar worked as tinkers and animal dealers. Ghorbat men mainly madesieves, drums, and bird cages, and the women peddled these as well as other items of household and personal use; they also worked as moneylenders to rural women. Peddling and the sale of various goods was also practiced by men and women of various groups, such as the Jalali, the Pikraj, the Shadibaz, the Noristani, and the Vangawala. The latter and the Pikraj also worked as animal dealers. Some men among the Shadibaz and the Vangawala entertained as monkey or bear handlers and snake charmers; men and women among the Baluch were musicians and dancers. The Baluch men were warriors that were feared by neighboring tribes and often were used as mercenaries. Jogi men and women had diverse subsistence activities, such as dealing in horses, harvesting,fortune-telling,bloodletting, andbegging.[citation needed]
In Iran, the Asheq of Azerbaijan, the Challi of Baluchistan, the Luti of Kurdistan, Kermānshāh, Īlām, and Lorestān, the Mehtar in the Mamasani district, the Sazandeh of Band-i Amir and Marv-dasht, and the Toshmal among the Bakhtyari pastoral groups worked as professional musicians. The men among the Kowli worked as tinkers, smiths, musicians, and monkey and bear handlers; they also made baskets, sieves, and brooms and dealt in donkeys. Their women made a living from peddling, begging, and fortune-telling.
The Ghorbat among the Basseri were smiths and tinkers, traded in pack animals, and made sieves, reed mats, and small wooden implements. In the Fārs region, the Qarbalband, the Kuli, and Luli were reported to work as smiths and to make baskets and sieves; they also dealt in pack animals, and their women peddled various goods among pastoral nomads. In the same region, the Changi and Luti were musicians and balladeers, and their children learned these professions from the age of 7 or 8 years.[citation needed]
The nomadic groups in Turkey make and sell cradles, deal in animals, and play music. The men of the sedentary groups work in towns as scavengers and hangmen; elsewhere they are fishermen, smiths, basket makers, and singers; their women dance at feasts and tell fortunes. Abdal men played music and made sieves, brooms, and wooden spoons for a living. The Tahtacı traditionally worked as lumberers; with increased sedentarization, however, they have taken to agriculture and horticulture.[citation needed]
Little is known for certain about the past of these communities; the history of each is almost entirely contained in their oral traditions. Although some groups—such as the Vangawala—are of Indian origin, some—like the Noristani—are most probably of local origin; still others probably migrated from adjoining areas. The Ghorbat and the Shadibaz claim to have originally come from Iran and Multan, respectively, and Tahtacı traditional accounts mention eitherBaghdadorKhorāsānas their original home. The Baluch say they[clarification needed]were attached as a service community to theJamshedi, after they fled Baluchistan because of feuds.[44][45]

## Yörüks
Still some groups such asSarıkeçililercontinues nomadic lifestyle between coastal townsMediterraneanandTaurus Mountainseven though most of them were settled by both lateOttomanandTurkishrepublic.

## Bukat people
The Bukat people of Borneo in Malaysia live within the region of the riverMendalam, which the natives callBuköt. Bukat is anethnonymthat encapsulates all the tribes in the region. These natives are historically self-sufficient but were also known to trade various goods. This is especially true for the clans who lived on the periphery of the territory. The products of their trade were varied and fascinating, including: "...resins (damar,Agathis dammara; jelutong bukit, Dyera costulata,gutta-percha,Palaquiumspp.); wild honey and beeswax (important in trade but often unreported); aromatic resin from insence wood (gaharu, Aquilaria microcarpa);camphor (found in the fissures ofDryobalanops aromaticus);several types of rotan of cane (Calamus rotanand other species); poison for blowpipe darts (one source isipohoripu: see Nieuwenhuis 1900a:137); the antlers of deer (the sambar,Cervus unicolor);rhinoceros horn (see Tillema 1939:142); pharmacologically valuable bezoar stones (concretions formed in the intestines and gallbladder of the gibbon,Seminopithecus,and in the wounds of porcupines,Hestrix crassispinus);birds' nests, the edible nests of swifts (Collocaliaspp.); the heads and feathers of two species of hornbills (Buceros rhinoceros, Rhinoplax vigil); and various hides (clouded leopards, bears, and other animals)."[46]These nomadic tribes also commonly hunted boar with poison blow darts for their own needs.

## See also
Figurative use of the term: