## Nutrition
Nutritionis thebiochemicalandphysiologicalprocess by which anorganismusesfoodandwaterto support itslife. The intake of these substances provides organisms withnutrients(divided intomacro-andmicro-) which can bemetabolizedto createenergyand chemical structures; too much or too little of an essential nutrient can causemalnutrition.Nutritional science, the study of nutrition as ahard science, typically emphasizeshuman nutrition.
The type of organism determines what nutrients it needs and how it obtains them. Organisms obtain nutrients by consumingorganic matter, consuming inorganic matter, absorbing light, or some combination of these. Some can produce nutrients internally by consuming basic elements, while others must consume other organisms to obtain pre-existing nutrients. All forms of life requirecarbon,energy, andwateras well as various othermolecules. Animals require complex nutrients such ascarbohydrates,lipids, andproteins, obtaining them by consuming other organisms. Humans have developedagricultureandcookingto replaceforagingand advance human nutrition. Plants acquire nutrients through thesoiland the atmosphere. Fungi absorb nutrients around them by breaking them down and absorbing them through themycelium.

## History
Scientific analysis of food and nutrients began during thechemical revolutionin the late 18th century. Chemists in the 18th and 19th centuries experimented with different elements and food sources to develop theories of nutrition.[1]Modern nutrition science began in the 1910s as individual micronutrients began to be identified. The first vitamin to be chemically identified wasthiaminein 1926, and vitamin C was identified as a protection against scurvy in 1932.[2]The role of vitamins in nutrition was studied in the following decades. The first recommended dietary allowances for humans were developed to address fears of disease caused by food deficiencies during theGreat Depressionand the Second World War.[3]Due to its importance in human health, the study of nutrition has heavily emphasized human nutrition and agriculture, whileecologyis a secondary concern.[4]

## Nutrients
Nutrients are substances that provide energy and physical components to the organism, allowing it to survive, grow, and reproduce. Nutrients can be basic elements or complexmacromolecules. Approximately 30 elements are found inorganic matter, withnitrogen,carbon, andphosphorusbeing the most important.[5]Macronutrientsare the primary substances required by an organism, andmicronutrientsare substances required by an organism in trace amounts. Organic micronutrients are classified asvitamins, and inorganic micronutrients are classified asminerals. Over-nutrition of macronutrients is a major cause of obesity and increases the risk of developing various non-communicable diseases (NCDs), including type 2 diabetes, stroke, hypertension, coronary heart disease, osteoporosis, and some forms of cancer.[6]Nutrients can also be classified as essential or nonessential, with essential meaning the body cannot synthesize the nutrient on its own.[7]
Nutrients are absorbed by the cells and used in metabolic biochemical reactions. These include fueling reactions that create precursormetabolitesand energy, biosynthetic reactions that convert precursor metabolites into building block molecules,polymerizationsthat combine these molecules into macromoleculepolymers, and assembly reactions that use these polymers to construct cellular structures.[5]

## Nutritional groups
Organisms can be classified by how they obtain carbon and energy.Heterotrophsare organisms that obtain nutrients by consuming the carbon of other organisms, whileautotrophsare organisms that produce their own nutrients from the carbon of inorganic substances likecarbon dioxide.Mixotrophsare organisms that can be heterotrophs and autotrophs, including someplanktonandcarnivorous plants.Phototrophsobtain energy from light, whilechemotrophsobtain energy by consuming chemical energy from matter.Organotrophsconsume other organisms to obtain electrons, whilelithotrophsobtain electrons from inorganic substances, such aswater,hydrogen sulfide,dihydrogen,iron(II),sulfur, orammonium.[8]Prototrophs can create essential nutrients from other compounds, whileauxotrophsmust consume preexisting nutrients.[9]

## Diet
In nutrition, thedietof an organism is the sum of the foods it eats.[10]A healthy diet improves the physical and mental health of an organism. This requires ingestion and absorption ofvitamins,minerals,essential amino acidsfrom protein andessential fatty acidsfrom fat-containing food.Carbohydrates, protein and fat play major roles in ensuring thequality of life,healthandlongevityof the organism.[11]Some cultures and religions have restrictions on what is acceptable for their diet.[12]

## Nutrient cycle
Anutrient cycleis abiogeochemical cycleinvolving the movement of inorganic matter through a combination of soil, organisms, air or water, where they are exchanged in organic matter.[13]Energy flow is a unidirectional and noncyclic pathway, whereas the movement ofmineral nutrientsis cyclic. Mineral cycles include thecarbon cycle,sulfur cycle,nitrogen cycle,water cycle,phosphorus cycle, andoxygen cycle, among others that continually recycle along with other mineral nutrients intoproductiveecological nutrition.[13]
Biogeochemical cyclesthat are performed by living organisms and natural processes arewater,carbon,nitrogen,phosphorus, andsulfur cycles.[14]Nutrient cycles allow these essential elements to return to the environment after being absorbed or consumed.[15]Without proper nutrient cycling, there would be a risk of change in oxygen levels, climate, and ecosystem function.[citation needed]

## Foraging
Foraging is the process of seeking out nutrients in the environment. It may also be defined to include the subsequent use of the resources. Some organisms, such as animals and bacteria, can navigate to find nutrients, while others, such as plants and fungi, extend outward to find nutrients. Foraging may be random, in which the organism seeks nutrients without method, or it may be systematic, in which the organism can go directly to a food source.[16]Organisms are able to detect nutrients throughtasteor other forms ofnutrient sensing, allowing them to regulate nutrient intake.[17]Optimal foraging theoryis a model that explains foraging behavior as acost–benefit analysisin which an animal must maximize the gain of nutrients while minimizing the amount of time and energy spent foraging. It was created to analyze the foraging habits of animals, but it can also be extended to other organisms.[18]Some organisms are specialists that are adapted to forage for a single food source, while others are generalists that can consume a variety of food sources.[19]

## Nutrient deficiency
Nutrient deficiencies, known asmalnutrition, occur when an organism does not have the nutrients that it needs. A deficiency is not the same as a nutrient inadequacy which occurs when the intake of nutrients is above the level of deficiency, but below the recommended dietary level. This may lead to hidden symptoms of nutrient deficiency that are difficult to identify.[20]Nutrient deficiency may be caused by a sudden decrease in nutrient intake or by an inability to absorb essential nutrients. Not only is malnutrition the result of a lack of necessary nutrients,[21]but it can also be a result of other illnesses and health conditions. When this occurs, an organism will adapt by reducing energy consumption and expenditure to prolong the use of stored nutrients. It will use stored energy reserves until they are depleted.[22]
A balanced diet includes appropriate amounts of all essential and non-essential nutrients. These can vary by age, weight, sex, physical activity levels, and more. A lack of just one essential nutrient can cause bodily harm, just as an overabundance can cause toxicity. The Daily Reference Values keep the majority of people from nutrient deficiencies.[23]DRVs are not recommendations but a combination of nutrient references to educate professionals and policymakers on what the maximum and minimum nutrient intakes are for the average person.[24]Food labels also use DRVs as a reference to create safe nutritional guidelines for the average healthy person.[25]

## Animal
Animals are heterotrophs that consume other organisms to obtain nutrients.Herbivoresare animals that eat plants,carnivoresare animals that eat other animals, andomnivoresare animals that eat both plants and other animals.[26]Many herbivores rely on bacterial fermentation to create digestible nutrients from indigestible plant cellulose, while obligate carnivores must eat animal meats to obtain certain vitamins or nutrients their bodies cannot otherwise synthesize. Animals generally have a higher requirement of energy in comparison to plants.[27]The macronutrients essential to animal life are carbohydrates,amino acids, andfatty acids.[7][28]
All macronutrients except water are required by the body for energy, however, this is not their sole physiological function. The energy provided by macronutrients in food is measured in kilocalories, usually called Calories, where 1 Calorie is the amount of energy required to raise 1 kilogram of water by 1 degree Celsius.[29]
Carbohydrates are molecules that store significant amounts of energy. Animals digest and metabolize carbohydrates to obtain this energy. Carbohydrates are typically synthesized by plants during metabolism, and animals have to obtain most carbohydrates from nature, as they have only a limited ability to generate them. They includesugars,oligosaccharides, andpolysaccharides.Glucoseis the simplest form of carbohydrate.[30]Carbohydrates are broken down to produce glucose andshort-chain fatty acids, and they are the most abundant nutrients for herbivorous land animals.[31]Carbohydrates contain 4 calories per gram.
Lipids provide animals with fats and oils. They are not soluble in water, and they can store energy for an extended period of time. They can be obtained from many different plant and animal sources. Most dietary lipids aretriglycerides, composed ofglyceroland fatty acids.Phospholipidsandsterolsare found in smaller amounts.[32]An animal's body will reduce the amount of fatty acids it produces as dietary fat intake increases, while it increases the amount of fatty acids it produces as carbohydrate intake increases.[33]Fats contain 9 calories per gram.
Protein consumed by animals is broken down to amino acids, which would be later used to synthesize new proteins. Protein is used to form cellular structures, fluids,[34]andenzymes(biologicalcatalysts). Enzymes are essential to mostmetabolicprocesses, as well asDNA replication,repair, andtranscription.[35]Protein contains 4 calories per gram.
Much ofanimal behavioris governed by nutrition.Migration patternsandseasonal breedingtake place in conjunction with food availability, andcourtship displaysare used to display an animal's health.[36]Animals develop positive and negative associations with foods that affect their health, and they can instinctively avoid foods that have causedtoxic injuryor nutritional imbalances through aconditioned food aversion. Some animals, such as rats, do not seek out new types of foods unless they have a nutrient deficiency.[37]

## Human
Early human nutrition consisted of foraging for nutrients, like other animals, but it diverged at the beginning of theHolocenewith theNeolithic Revolution, in which humans developed agriculture to produce food. The Chemical Revolution in the 18th century allowed humans to study the nutrients in foods and develop more advanced methods offood preparation. Major advances in economics and technology during the 20th century allowedmass productionandfood fortificationto better meet the nutritional needs of humans.[38]Human behavioris closely related to human nutrition, making it a subject ofsocial sciencein addition to biology. Nutrition in humans is balanced with eating for pleasure, and optimal diet may vary depending on the demographics and health concerns of each person.[39]Social determinants of health (SDOH) and structural factors drive nutrition and diet-related health disparities.[40]
Humans are omnivores that eat a variety of foods. Cultivation ofcerealsand production ofbreadhas made up a key component of human nutrition since the beginning of agriculture. Early humans hunted animals for meat, and modern humans domesticate animals to consume their meat and eggs. The development ofanimal husbandryhas also allowed humans in some cultures to consume themilkof other animals and process it into foods such ascheese. Other foods eaten by humans include nuts, seeds, fruits, and vegetables. Access to domesticated animals as well asvegetable oilshas caused a significant increase in human intake of fats and oils. Humans have developed advanced methods offood processingthat prevent contamination of pathogenic microorganisms and simplify the production of food. These include drying, freezing, heating, milling, pressing, packaging, refrigeration, and irradiation. Most cultures addherbsandspicesto foods before eating to add flavor, though most do not significantly affect nutrition. Other additives are also used to improve the safety, quality, flavor, and nutritional content of food.[41]
Humans obtain most carbohydrates as starch from cereals, though sugar has grown in importance.[30]Lipids can be found inanimal fat,butterfat, vegetable oil, andleaf vegetables, and they are also used to increase flavor in foods.[32]Protein can be found in virtually all foods, as it makes up cellular material, though certain methods of food processing may reduce the amount of protein in a food.[42]Humans can also obtain energy fromethanol, which is both a food and a drug, but it provides relatively few essential nutrients and is associated with nutritional deficiencies and other health risks.[43]
In humans, poor nutrition can cause deficiency-related diseases, such asblindness,anemia,scurvy,preterm birth,stillbirthandcretinism,[44]or nutrient-excess conditions, such asobesity[45]andmetabolic syndrome.[46]Other conditions possibly affected by nutrition disorders includecardiovascular diseases,[47]diabetes,[48][49]andosteoporosis.[50]Undernutrition can lead towastingin acute cases, andstuntingofmarasmusin chronic cases of malnutrition.[44]

## Domesticated animal
Indomesticated animals, such aspets,livestock, andworking animals, as well as otheranimals in captivity, nutrition is managed by humans throughanimal feed.Fodderandforageare provided to livestock. Specializedpet foodhas been manufactured since 1860, and subsequent research and development have addressed the nutritional needs of pets.Dog foodandcat foodin particular are heavily studied and typically include all essential nutrients for these animals. Cats are sensitive to some common nutrients, such astaurine, and require additional nutrients derived from meat. Large-breed puppies are susceptible to overnutrition, as small-breed dog food is more energy dense than they can absorb.[51]

## Plant
Most plants obtain nutrients through inorganic substancesabsorbed from the soilor the atmosphere. Carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur are essential nutrients that make up organic material in a plant and allow enzymic processes. These are absorbed ions in the soil, such asbicarbonate,nitrate,ammonium, andsulfate, or they are absorbed as gases, such as carbon dioxide, water, oxygen gas, andsulfur dioxide. Phosphorus, boron, and silicon are used foresterification. They are obtained through the soil asphosphates,boric acid, andsilicic acid, respectively. Other nutrients used by plants are potassium, sodium, calcium, magnesium, manganese, chlorine, iron, copper, zinc, and molybdenum.[52]
Plants uptake essential elements from the soil through theirrootsand from the air (consisting of mainly nitrogen and oxygen) through theirleaves. Nutrient uptake in the soil is achieved bycation exchange, whereinroot hairspumphydrogen ions(H+) into the soil throughproton pumps. These hydrogen ions displacecationsattached to negatively charged soil particles so that the cations are available for uptake by the root. In the leaves,stomataopen to take in carbon dioxide and expeloxygen.[53]Althoughnitrogenis plentiful in the Earth's atmosphere, very few plants can use this directly. Most plants, therefore, require nitrogen compounds to be present in the soil in which they grow. This is made possible by the fact that largely inert atmospheric nitrogen is changed in anitrogen fixationprocess to biologically usable forms in the soil by bacteria.[54]
As these nutrients do not provide the plant with energy, they must obtain energy by other means.Green plantsabsorb energy fromsunlightwithchloroplastsand convert it to usable energy throughphotosynthesis.[55]

## Fungus
Fungi are chemoheterotrophs that consume external matter for energy. Most fungi absorb matter through the root-like mycelium, which grows through the organism's source of nutrients and can extend indefinitely. The fungus excretesextracellular enzymesto break down surrounding matter and then absorbs the nutrients through the cell wall. Fungi can be parasitic, saprophytic, or symbiotic. Parasitic fungi attach and feed on living hosts, such as animals, plants, or other fungi. Saprophytic fungi feed on dead and decomposing organisms. Symbiotic fungi grow around other organisms and exchange nutrients with them.[56]

## Protist
Protistsinclude alleukaryotesthat are not animals, plants, or fungi, resulting in great diversity between them.Algaeare photosynthetic protists that can produce energy from light. Several types of protists use mycelium similar to those of fungi.Protozoaare heterotrophic protists, and different protozoa seek nutrients in different ways.Flagellateprotozoa use aflagellumto assist in hunting for food, and some protozoa travel via infectious spores to act as parasites.[57]Many protists are mixotrophic, having both phototrophic and heterotrophic characteristics. Mixotrophic protists will typically depend on one source of nutrients while using the other as a supplemental source or a temporary alternative when its primary source is unavailable.[58]

## Prokaryote
Prokaryotes, includingbacteriaandarchaea, vary greatly in how they obtain nutrients across nutritional groups. Prokaryotes can only transport soluble compounds across their cell envelopes, but they can break down chemical components around them. Some lithotrophic prokaryotes areextremophilesthat can survive in nutrient-deprived environments by breaking down inorganic matter.[59]Phototrophic prokaryotes, such ascyanobacteriaandChloroflexia, can engage in photosynthesis to obtain energy from sunlight. This is common among bacteria that form in mats atop geothermal springs. Phototrophic prokaryotes typically obtain carbon from assimilating carbon dioxide through theCalvin cycle.[60]
Some prokaryotes, such asBdellovibrioandEnsifer, are predatory and feed on other single-celled organisms. Predatory prokaryotes seek out other organisms throughchemotaxisor random collision, merge with the organism, degrade it, and absorb the released nutrients. Predatory strategies of prokaryotes include attaching to the outer surface of the organism and degrading it externally, entering the cytoplasm of the organism, or by entering theperiplasmic spaceof the organism. Groups of predatory prokaryotes may forgo attachment by collectively producinghydrolyticenzymes.[61]