## Olive oil
Olive oilis avegetable oilobtained by pressing wholeolives(the fruit ofOleaeuropaea, a traditionaltree cropof theMediterranean Basin) and extracting the oil.
It is commonly used in cooking for frying foods, as acondiment, or as asalad dressing. It can also be found in somecosmetics,pharmaceuticals,soaps, andfuelsfor traditionaloil lamps. It also has additional uses in some religions. The olive is one of three core food plants inMediterranean cuisine, with wheat and grapes. Olive trees have been cultivated around the Mediterranean since the 8th millennium BC.[4]
In 2022, Spain was the world's largest producer, manufacturing 24% of the world's total. Other large producers were Italy, Greece, and Turkey, collectively accounting for 59% of the global market.[5]
The composition of olive oil varies with thecultivar, altitude, time of harvest, and extraction process. It consists mainly ofoleic acid(up to 83%), with smaller amounts of otherfatty acidsincludinglinoleic acid(up to 21%) andpalmitic acid(up to 20%). Extra virgin olive oil (EVOO) is required to have no more than 0.8%free acidity, and is considered to have favorable flavor characteristics.

## History
Olive oil has long been a common ingredient inMediterranean cuisine, includingancient GreekandRoman cuisine. Wild olives, which originated inAsia Minor, were collected byNeolithicpeople as early as the 8th millennium BC.[6][7]Besides food, olive oil has been used for religiousrituals,medicines, as afuelinoil lamps,soap-making, and skincare application.[4]TheSpartansand other Greeks used oil to rub themselves while exercising in thegymnasia. From its beginnings early in the 7th century BC, the cosmetic use of olive oil quickly spread to all of the Hellenic city-states, together with athletes training in the nude, and lasted close to a thousand years despite its great expense.[8][9]Olive oil was also popular as a form of birth control;Aristotlein hisHistory of Animalsrecommends applying a mixture of olive oil combined with either oil ofcedar, ointment oflead, or ointment offrankincenseto thecervixto prevent pregnancy.[10]

## Early cultivation
The exact date and location of olive tree domestication are unclear. The modern olive tree may have originated in ancient Persia andMesopotamiaand spread to theLevantand later toNorth Africa, though some scholars argue for an Egyptian origin.[11]
The oldest traces of olive oil inItalydate back to the3rd millennium BC.[12]The olive tree reached Greece,CarthageandLibyasometime in the28th century BC, having been spread westward by thePhoenicians.[11]Until around 1500 BC, eastern coastal areas of the Mediterranean were most heavily cultivated.[citation needed]Evidence also suggests that olives were being grown inCreteas long ago as 2500 BC. The earliest surviving olive oilamphoraedate to 3500 BC (Early Minoantimes), though the production of olive oil is assumed to have started before 4000 BC.[13]Olive trees were certainly cultivated by theLate Minoanperiod (1500 BC) in Crete, and perhaps as early as the Early Minoan.[14]The cultivation of olive trees in Crete became particularly intense in the post-palatial period and played an important role in the island's economy, as it did across the Mediterranean.[15]Later, as Greek colonies were established in other parts of the Mediterranean, olive farming was introduced to places likeSpainand continued to spread throughout theRoman Empire.[11]
Olive trees were introduced to theAmericasin the 16th century, when cultivation began in areas with a climate similar to the Mediterranean, such as Chile, Argentina, andCalifornia.[11]
Recentgenetic studiessuggest that species used by modern cultivars descend from multiple wild populations, but detailed history of domestication is unknown.[16]

## Trade and production
Archaeological evidenceinGalileeshows that by 6000 BC olives were being turned into olive oil[17]and in 4500 BC at a now-submerged prehistoric settlement south ofHaifa.[18]
Olive trees and oil production in the Eastern Mediterranean can be traced to archives of the ancient city-stateEbla(2600–2240 BC), which were located on the outskirts ofAleppo. Here, some dozen documents dated 2400 BC describe the lands of the king and the queen. These belonged to a library of clay tablets perfectly preserved by having been baked in the fire that destroyed the palace. A later source is the frequent mentions of oil in theTanakh.[19]
DynasticEgyptiansbefore 2000 BC imported olive oil from Crete, Syria, andCanaan, and oil was an important item of commerce and wealth. Remains of olive oil have been found in jugs over 4,000 years old in a tomb on the island ofNaxosin theAegean Sea.Sinuhe, the Egyptian exile who lived in northern Canaan c.1960 BC, wrote of abundant olive trees.[20]The Minoans used olive oil in religious ceremonies. The oil became a principal product of theMinoan civilization, where it is thought to have represented wealth.[21]
Olive oil was also a major export ofMycenaean Greece(c. 1450–1150 BC).[22][11]Scholars believe the oil was made by a process where olives were placed inwoven matsand squeezed. The oil was collected in vats. This process was known from theBronze Age, was used by the Egyptians, and continued to be used through theHellenistic period.[11]In the Iron Age, settlements in and around theJudaean Lowlands, includingEkron,Timnah, andGezer, emerged as key hubs for olive oil production and commerce.[23]Evidence from theSamaria ostraca, discovered in the capital of theKingdom of Israel, includes a reference to "washed oil," a term believed to refer to virgin olive oil.[23]
Olive oil may have been produced as early as the Bronze Age in Italy, though this intensified throughout the first millennium BCE and into the Roman period. Some of the earliest evidence of rotary olive mills for the production of olive oil have been found in southern Italy.[4]The importance of olive oil as a commercial commodity increased after the Roman conquest of Egypt, Greece, and Asia Minor, which led to more trade along the Mediterranean. Olive trees were planted throughout the entire Mediterranean basin during the evolution of the Roman Republic and Empire. According to the historianPliny the Elder, Italy had "excellent olive oil at reasonable prices" by the 1st century AD—"the best in the Mediterranean".[citation needed]More sophisticated production techniques such as theolive pressandtrapetum(pictured left) became increasingly widespread throughout the Imperial era, and eventually screw presses were commonly used to produce olive oil from Spain to the eastern Mediterranean.[24][11]Many ancient presses still exist in the Eastern Mediterranean region, and some dating to the Roman period are still used today.[25]Productivity was greatly improved by Joseph Graham's development of thehydraulicpressing system in 1795.[11]

## Symbolism and mythology
The olive tree has historically been a symbol of peace between nations. It has played a religious and social role inGreek mythology, especially concerning the city ofAthens, named after the goddessAthenabecause her gift of an olive tree was held to be more precious than rivalPoseidon's gift of a salt spring.[11]

## Varieties
There are manyolive cultivars, each with a particular flavor, texture, and shelf life that make them more or less suitable for different applications, such as direct human consumption on bread or in salads, indirect consumption in domestic cooking or catering, or industrial uses such as animal feed or engineering applications.[26]During the stages of maturity, olive fruit changes color from green to violet, and then black. Olive oil taste characteristics depend on the stage of ripeness at which olive fruits are collected.[26]

## Culinary use
Olive oil is an importantcooking oilin countries surrounding the Mediterranean, and it forms one of the three staple food plants ofMediterranean cuisine, the other two being wheat (as inpasta, bread, andcouscous), and thegrape, used as a dessert fruit and for wine.[27]
Extra virgin olive oil is mostly used raw as a condiment and as an ingredient insalad dressings. If uncompromised by heat, the flavor is stronger. It can also be used forsautéing.
When extra virgin olive oil is heated above 210–216 °C (410–421 °F), depending on its free fatty acid content, the unrefined particles within the oil are burned. This leads to a deteriorated taste. Refined olive oils are suited fordeep fryingbecause of the highersmoke pointand milder flavour.[28]Extra virgin oils have a smoke point around 180–215 °C (356–419 °F),[1]with higher-quality oils having a higher smoke point,[29]whereas refined light olive oil has a smoke point up to 230 °C (446 °F).[1]That they can be used for deep frying is contrary to thecommon misconceptionthat there are no olive oils with a smoke point as high as many othervegetable oils. In the misconception, heating at these high temperatures is theorised to impact taste or nutrition.[30][31]

## Christianity
The Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and Anglican churches use olive oil for theoil of catechumensused to bless those preparing for baptism, and oil of the sick used to confer the sacrament ofanointing of the sickor extreme unction. Olive oil mixed with a perfuming agent such asbalsamisconsecratedbybishopsas sacredchrism, which is used to confer the sacrament ofconfirmationas a symbol of the strengthening of the Holy Spirit, in the rites ofbaptismand theordinationofpriestsand bishops, in the consecration ofaltarsandchurches, and in the anointing of monarchs at theircoronation.
Eastern Orthodox Christiansstill use oil lamps in their churches, home prayer corners, and cemeteries. A vigil lamp consists of a votive glass hanging from a wall or on a table filled with olive oil floating on a little water with a cork float carrying a wick. Olive oil is a usual offering to churches and cemeteries.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsuses pure olive oil that the priesthood has blessed (consecrated) for anointing the sick.[32]

## Judaism
InJewishobservance, olive oil was the only fuel permitted for use in the seven-branchedmenorahused in the service of theMishkanthe Exodusof theTribes of IsraelfromEgypt, and later in the permanentTemple in Jerusalem. According to biblical law, the oil used for the menorah had to be pure olive oil produced by the first pressing of the olives, traditionally obtained by gently crushing them so that only the first oil was collected.[33]This oil was consecrated exclusively for sacred use in the Temple, prepared and maintained by the priests, and stored in specially designated vessels.
Olive oil also plays a central role in the story ofHanukkah, which commemorates the rededication of the Temple following theMaccabean Revolt.[34]According to Jewish tradition, a singlecruseof consecrated oil, enough for one day, miraculously burned for eight days in theTemple menorah.[35]In modern observance of Hanukkah, candles are commonly used to light the Hanukkah menorah, though olive oil lamps are often preferred by some communities in order to more closely replicate the original Temple practice.[36]
In ancient Israelite religion, olive oil was also a key ingredient in the sacred holy anointing oil described in the Hebrew Bible. This oil was used to ritually consecrate priests, kings, prophets, and sacred objects, symbolizing divine selection and sanctification[37]

## Other
Olive oil is a natural and safelubricant, and can be used to lubricate kitchen machinery (grinders, blenders, cookware, etc.). It can also be used for illumination in oil lamps, and as the base for soaps and detergents.[38]Some cosmetics also use olive oil as their base,[39]and it can be used as a substitute for machine oil.[40][41][42]Olive oil has also been used as both solvent and ligand in the synthesis of cadmium selenidequantum dots.[43]
TheRanieri Filo della Torreis an international literary prize for writings about extra virgin olive oil. It yearly honors poetry, fiction, and non-fiction about extra virgin olive oil.

## Extraction
Olive oil is produced by grinding ripe olives and extracting the oil by mechanical or chemical means. Underripe olives usually produce undesirably bitter oil, and overripe olives can produce oil with fermentation defects. The process is generally as follows:

## Ancient Levant
In the ancientLevant, three methods were used to produce different grades of olive oil.[46]The finest oil was produced from fully developed and ripe olives harvested solely from the apex of the tree[47]and lightly pressed, "for what flows from light pressure is very sweet and very thin".[48]The remaining olives, of varying ripeness,[47]are pressed with a heavier weight.[48]Inferior oil is produced from unripe olives that are stored for extended periods until they grow soft or begin to shrivel to become more fit for grinding.[49]Others are left for extended periods in pits in the ground to induce sweating and decay before they are ground.[50]According to theGeoponica, salt and a littlenitreare added when oil is stored.[48]
In the Levant in medieval times a sharp-tasting green oil known asanpeqinon[verification needed](Ancient Greek:ὀμφάκιον, ὀμφάχινον;Arabic:زيت الأنفاق), a corruption of theLatinwordsoleum omphacium, was sometimes extracted from unripe olives and used in cuisine and medicine.[51][52][53]

## Pomace handling
The remaining semi-solid waste, calledpomace, retains a small quantity (about 5–10%) of "pomace oil" that cannot be extracted by further pressing, but only with chemical solvents. This is done in specialized chemical plants, not in the oil mills.[54]Since the ancient Roman period, pomace was commonly used as a domestic and industrial fuel source, burning at a high temperature for longer and with less smoke than charcoal.[4]
Handling of olive waste is an environmental challenge because thewastewater, millions of tons (billions of liters) annually in theEuropean Union, has lowbiodegradability, istoxicto plants, and cannot be processed through conventional water treatment systems.[54]Traditionally, olive pomace would be used ascompostor developed as a possiblebiofuel, although these uses introduce concern due to chemicals present in the pomace.[54]A process called "valorization" of olive pomace is under research and development, consisting of additional processing to obtain value-addedbyproducts, such asanimal feed,food additivesfor human products, andphenolicandfatty acidextractsfor potential human use.[54]

## Production
In 2022, world production of olive oil was 2.7 milliontonnes, led by Spain with 24% of the total (table). Other major producers were Italy, Greece, Turkey, and Tunisia (table).
Villacarrillo,Jaén,Andalucía, Spain, is a centre of olive oil production. 75% of Spain's olive oil production derives from the region ofAndalucía, particularly withinJaén provincewhich produces 70% of the olive oil in Spain.[55]The world's largest olive oilmill(almazara, in Spanish), capable of processing 2,500 tonnes of olives per day, is in the town ofVillacarrillo, Jaén.[55]
Italian major producers are the regions ofCalabriaand, above all,Apulia. Many PDO and PGI extra-virgin olive oils are produced in these regions. Extra-virgin olive oil is also produced inTuscany,[56]in cities includingLucca,Florence, andSiena, which are also included in the association of Città dell'Olio.[57]Italy imports about 65% of Spanish olive oil exports.[58]

## Global consumption
Greece has the highest per capita consumption of olive oil worldwide, around 24 liters per year.[59]Consumption in Spain is 15 liters; Italy 13 liters;[59]and Syria, around 3 liters.[60]Canada consumes 1.5 liters and the US 1 liter.[59]

## Regulation
TheInternational Olive Council(IOC) is an intergovernmental organisation of states that produce olives or products derived from olives, such as olive oil. The IOC officially governs 95% of international production and influences the rest. The EU regulates the use of differentprotected designation of originlabels for olive oils.[61]
The United States is not a member of the IOC and is not subject to its authority, but on October 25, 2010, theU.S. Department of Agricultureadopted new voluntary olive oil grading standards that closely parallel those of the IOC, with some adjustments for the characteristics of olives grown in the U.S.[62]U.S. Customs regulations on "country of origin" state that if a non-origin nation is shown on the label, then the real origin must be shown on the same side of the label in letters of comparable size, so as not to mislead the consumer.[63][64]Yet most major U.S. brands continue to put "imported from Italy" on the front label in large letters and other origins on the back in very small print.[65]"In fact, olive oil labeled 'Italian' often comes from Turkey, Tunisia, Morocco, Spain, and Greece."[66]This makes it unclear what percentage of the olive oil is really of Italian origin.

## Commercial grades
All production begins by crushing or pressing the olive fruit to transform it into olive paste. This paste ismalaxed(slowly churned or mixed) to allow the microscopic oil droplets to agglomerate. The oil is then separated from the watery matter and fruit pulp with the use of a press (traditional method) orcentrifugation(modern method). The residue that remains after pressing or centrifugation can also produce a small amount of oil, calledpomace.
One parameter used to characterise an oil is itsacidity.[67]In this context, "acidity" is notchemical acidityin the sense ofpH, but the percent (measured by weight) offreeoleic acid. Olive oil acidity is a measure of thehydrolysisof the oil's triglycerides: as the oil degrades and becomes oxidized, more fatty acids are freed from theglycerides, increasing the level of free acidity and thereby increasinghydrolytic rancidity.[68]Rancidity not only impacts the taste and color but also its nutritional value.[69]
Another measure of the oil's chemical degradation is theperoxide value,[70]which measures the degree to which the oil isoxidizedbyfree radicals, leading tooxidativerancidity.Phenolic acidspresent in olive oil also add acidicsensoryproperties to aroma and flavor.[71]
The grades of oil extracted from the olive fruit can be classified as:

## International Olive Council
In countries that adhere to the standards of theInternational Olive Council,[73]as well as in Australia, and under the voluntaryUnited States Department of Agriculturelabeling standards in the United States:
Extra virgin olive oilis the highest grade of virgin olive oil derived bycold mechanical extractionwithout use ofsolventsor refining methods.[72][74]It contains no more than 0.8%free acidity, and is judged to have a superior taste, having some fruitiness and no defined sensory defects.[75]Extra virgin olive oil accounts for less than 10% of oil in many producing countries; the percentage is far higher in some Mediterranean countries.
The International Olive Council requires the median of the fruity attribute to be higher than zero for a given olive oil in order to meet the criteria of extra virgin olive oil classification.
Virgin olive oilis a lesser grade of virgin oil, withfree acidityof up to 2.0%, and is judged to have a good taste, but may include some sensory defects.
Refined olive oilis virgin oil refined using charcoal and other chemical and physical filters, methods which do not alter the glyceridic structure. It has a free acidity, expressed as oleic acid, of not more than 0.3 grams per 100 grams (0.3%), and its other characteristics correspond to those fixed for this category in this standard. It is obtained by refining virgin oils to eliminate high acidity or organoleptic defects. Oils labeled aspure olive oilorolive oilare primarily refined olive oil, with a small addition of virgin oil for taste.
Olive pomace oilis refined pomace olive oil, often blended with some virgin oil. It is fit for consumption, but may not be described simply asolive oil. It has a more neutral flavor than pure or virgin olive oil, making it less desirable to users concerned with flavor; however, it has the same fat composition as regular olive oil, giving it the same health benefits. It also has a high smoke point, and consequently is widely used in restaurants and home cooking in some countries.

## United States
The United States is not a member of the IOC and does not implement its grades, but on October 25, 2010, theUnited States Department of Agriculture(USDA) established Standards for Grades of Olive Oil and Olive-Pomace Oil which closely parallel the IOC standards:[76][77]
These grades are voluntary. Certification is available, for a fee, from the USDA.[77]
In 2014, California adopted a set of olive oil standards for olive oil made from California-grown olives. The California Department of Food and Agriculture Grade and Labeling Standards for Olive Oil, Refined-Olive Oil, and Olive-Pomace Oil are mandatory for producers of more than 5,000gallonsof California olive oil. This joins other official state, federal, and international olive oil standards.[78]
Several olive producer associations, such as theNorth American Olive Oil Associationand theCalifornia Olive Oil Council, also offer grading and certification within the United States.[79][80]Oleologist Nicholas Coleman suggests that the California Olive Oil Council certification is the most stringent of the voluntary grading schemes in the United States.[81]
Country of origin can be established by one or two-letter country codes printed on the bottle or label. Country codes include I=Italy, GR=Greece, E=Spain, TU=Tunisia, MA=Morocco, CL=Chile, AG=Argentina, AU=Australia.

## Adulteration
There have been allegations, particularly in Italy and Spain, that regulation can be sometimes lax and corrupt.[88]Major shippers are claimed to routinely adulterate olive oil so that only about 40% of olive oil sold as "extra virgin" in Italy actually meets the specification.[89]In some cases,colza oil(extracted fromrapeseed) with added color and flavor has been labeled and sold as olive oil.[90]This extensive fraud prompted the Italian government to mandate a new labeling law in 2007 for companies selling olive oil, under which every bottle of Italian olive oil would have to declare the farm and press on which it was produced, as well as display a precise breakdown of the oils used, for blended oils.[91]In February 2008, however, EU officials took issue with the new law, stating that under EU rules such labeling should be voluntary rather than compulsory.[90]Under EU rules, olive oil may be sold as Italian even if it only contains a small amount of Italian oil.[91]
Extra-virgin olive oil has strict requirements and is checked for "sensory defects" that include: rancid, fusty, musty, winey (vinegary), and muddy sediment. These defects can occur for different reasons. The most common are:
In March 2008, 400 Italian police officers conducted Operation Golden Oil, arresting 23 people and confiscating 85 farms after an investigation revealed a large-scale scheme to relabel oils from other Mediterranean nations as Italian.[93]In April 2008, another operation impounded seven olive oil plants and arrested 40 people in nine provinces of northern and southern Italy for addingchlorophylltosunflowerandsoya bean oiland selling it as extra virgin olive oil, both in Italy and abroad; 25,000 liters of the fake oil were seized and prevented from being exported.[94]
On March 15, 2011, the prosecutor's office in Florence, Italy, working in conjunction with the forestry department, indicted two managers and an officer of Carapelli, one of the brands of the Spanish company Grupo SOS (which recently changed its name to Deoleo). The charges involved falsified documents and food fraud. Carapelli lawyer Neri Pinucci said the company was not worried about the charges and that "the case is based on an irregularity in the documents."[95]
In February 2012, Spanish authorities investigated an international olive oil fraud in which palm, avocado, sunflower, and other cheaper oils were passed off as Italian olive oil. Police said the oils were blended in an industrial biodiesel plant and adulterated in a way to hide markers that would have revealed their true nature. The oils were not toxic and posed no health risk, according to a statement by theGuardia Civil. Nineteen people were arrested following the year-long joint probe by the police and Spanish tax authorities, as part of  Operation Lucerna.[96]
Using tiny print to state the origin of blended oil is used as a legal loophole by manufacturers of adulterated and mixed olive oil.[97]
Journalist Tom Mueller has investigated crime and adulteration in the olive oil business, publishing the article "Slippery Business" inNew Yorkermagazine,[89]followed by the 2011 bookExtra Virginity. On 3 January 2016Bill Whitakerpresented a program on CBS News including interviews with Mueller and with Italian authorities.[98][99]It was reported that in the previous month, 5,000 tons of adulterated olive oil had been sold in Italy, and thatorganised crimewas heavily involved—the term "Agrimafia" was used. The point was made by Mueller that the profit margin on adulterated olive oil was three times that on the illegal narcotic drugcocaine. He said that over 50% of olive oil sold in Italy was adulterated, as was 75–80% of that sold in the US. Whitaker reported that three samples of "extra virgin olive oil" had been bought in a US supermarket and tested; two of the three samples did not meet the required standard, and one of them—from a top-selling US brand—was exceptionally poor.
In early February 2017, theCarabinieripolice arrested 33 suspects in the Calabrian mafia'sPiromalli 'ndrina('Ndrangheta), which was allegedly exporting fake extra virgin olive oil to the U.S.; the product was actually inexpensive olive pomace oil fraudulently labeled.[100]Less than a year earlier, the American television program60 Minuteshad warned that "the olive oil business has been corrupted by the Mafia" and that "Agromafia" was a 16 billiondollarper year enterprise. A Carabinieri investigator interviewed on the program said that "olive oil fraud has gone on for the better part of four millennia" but today, it's particularly "easy for the bad guys to either introduce adulterated olive oils or mix in lower quality olive oils with extra-virgin olive oil".[101]Weeks later, a report byForbesmagazine stated that "it's reliably reported that 80% of the Italian olive oil on the [US] market is fraudulent" and that "a massive olive oil scandal is being uncovered in Southern Italy (Puglia, Umbria and Campania)".[102]

## Quality control and fraud
In July 2024, the European Union reported a significant increase in olive oil fraud and mislabeling cases. The European Commission's annual report on food fraud revealed that olive oil remained one of the most frequently adulterated food products, with incidents reaching a record high.[103]

## Mislabeling and adulteration
The most common forms of olive oil fraud include:
These fraudulent practices not only deceive consumers but also undermine the reputation of legitimate producers, particularly those from traditional olive-growing regions in the Mediterranean.[103]

## EU response
To combat the rising fraud cases, theEuropean Unionhas implemented several measures:
The EU has also launched a public awareness campaign to educate consumers about olive oil quality and how to identify authentic products.[103]

## Impact on the industry
The surge in fraud cases has led to:
Industry experts emphasize the importance of supporting reputable producers and urge consumers to be more vigilant when purchasing olive oil, particularly when prices seem unusually low for claimed quality.[103]

## Constituents
Olive oil is composed mainly of the mixedtriglycerideesters ofoleic acid,linoleic acid,palmitic acidand of otherfatty acids,[104][105]along with traces ofsqualene(up to 0.7%) andsterols(about 0.2%phytosteroland tocosterols). The composition varies by cultivar, region, altitude, time of harvest, and extraction process.

## Phenolic composition
Olive oil contains traces ofpolyphenols(about 0.5%), such asestersoftyrosol,hydroxytyrosol,oleocanthal, andoleuropein,[71][135]which give olive oil a slightlybitter tasteand characteristic aroma.[136]Olive oil contains numerous polyphenols, among which areelenolic acid, a marker for maturation of olives,[71][137]and alpha-tocopherol, avitamin Ecompound.[138]Oleuropein, together with other closely related compounds such as10-hydroxyoleuropein,ligstrosideand10-hydroxyligstroside, aretyrosolestersof elenolic acid. Other phenolic constituents includeflavonoids,lignans, andpinoresinol.[139][better source needed]
Polyphenols, which are beneficial to health, are vulnerable to degradation largely by heat. Extraction of cold-pressed olive oil at temperatures below 25°C (the maximum permitted for cold-pressed oil is 27°C), improves retention of polyphenols, as does processing just hours after harvesting, harvesting early, avoiding prolonged mixing, and minimising exposure to oxygen. Some measures to preserve polyphenol content reduce yield.[140]In use, prolonged storage reduces polyphenol concentration; storage in a dark glass container at or below 15°C, or even refrigeration, is better. When oil is used for cooking rather than at room temperature, polyphenol content decreases with temperature, dropping significantly at 150°C.[141]
A peppery or bitter taste indicates higher polyphenol content.[142]

## Nutrition
Olive oil is 100%fat, containing nocarbohydrates,dietary fiber,proteinor water (table).
In a reference amount of 100 grams (3.5 oz), olive oil supplies 884kcalsoffood energy, and is a rich source (20% or more of theDaily Value, DV) ofvitamin E(96% DV) andvitamin K(50% DV) (table).
Onetablespoon(13.5 g) of olive oil supplies 119 calories of food energy and contains 13.5 g of fat, including 9.9 g ofmonounsaturated fat(mainly asoleic acid), 1.4 g ofpolyunsaturated fat(mainly aslinoleic acid), and 1.9 g ofsaturated fat(mainly aspalmitic acid) (see pick list from table reference).

## Potential health effects
In the United States, theFDAallows producers of olive oil to place the following qualifiedhealth claimonproduct labels:[144][145]
Limited and not conclusive scientific evidence suggests that eating about 2 tbsp. (23 g) of olive oil daily may reduce the risk of coronary heart disease due to the monounsaturated fat in olive oil. To achieve this possible benefit, olive oil is to replace a similar amount of saturated fat and not increase the overall number of calories consumed in a day.
In a review by theEuropean Food Safety Authority(EFSA) in 2011, health claims on olive oil were approved for protection by itspolyphenolsagainstoxidationof blood lipids,[146]and for maintenance of normal bloodLDL-cholesterollevels by replacing saturated fats in the diet witholeic acid.[147](See also: Commission Regulation (EU) 432/2012 of 16 May 2012).[148]Despite its approval, the EFSA has noted that a definitivecause-and-effectrelationship has not been adequately established for consumption of olive oil and maintaining normal (fasting) blood concentrations oftriglycerides, normal bloodHDL-cholesterolconcentrations, and normalblood glucoseconcentrations.[149]
A 2014 meta-analysis concluded that increased consumption of olive oil was associated with reduced risk of all-cause mortality, cardiovascular events andstroke, while monounsaturated fatty acids of mixed animal and plant origin showed no significant effects.[150]Another meta-analysis in 2018 found high-polyphenol olive oil intake was associated with improved measures of total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol,malondialdehyde, and oxidized LDL when compared to low-polyphenol olive oils, although it recommended longer studies, and more investigation of non-Mediterranean populations.[151]