## Parliament
Aparliamentis atype of legislature, or law-making body, of astate. Generally, a parliament has three functions:representingtheelectorate, makinglaws, and overseeing theexecutive governmentvia hearings and inquiries. Its role is similar to that of asenate,synodorcongress; a parliament is the institutional form ofparliamentary systemsbased on thefusion of powers. The termparliamentis commonly used in countries that are current or formermonarchies. Some contexts restrict the use of the word to parliamentary systems, although it is also used to describe the legislature in somepresidential systems(e.g., theParliament of Ghana), even where it is not in theofficial name. A parliament is typically made up of electedmembers, who arelegislators.
Historically, parliaments included various kinds of deliberative, consultative, and judicial assemblies. Parliamentary gatherings in theMiddle Agesbegan to establish thatmonarchswere subject to law and first summoned representatives of common people, notably theCortes of Leónin 1188, and anEnglish parliament in 1265, which developed into an enduringHouse of Commons. During theearly modern period, theGlorious Revolutionof 1688 in Britain established the primacy ofparliamentary sovereignty, through which therule of lawcould be enforced. Many other modern concepts of parliamentary government developed in theKingdom of Great Britain(1707–1800) and were later exported to other countries around the world. Therevolutions of 1848in Europe largely failed to strengthen parliaments in most European countries, as conservative forces regained control and reversed changes, but they made a return to the pre-1848 status quo impossible, leading to gradual, long-term parliamentary development across much of Europe.[2]Expansion ofsuffragein the 19th and 20th centuries led to many parliaments around the world becomingdemocraticallyelected.

## Etymology
The English term is derived fromAnglo-Normanand dates to the 14th century, coming from the 11th centuryOld Frenchwordparlement'discussion, discourse', fromparler,'to talk'.[3]The meaning evolved over time, originally referring to any discussion, conversation, or negotiation through various kinds of deliberative or judicial groups, often summoned by a monarch. By the 15th century, in Britain, it had come to specifically mean the legislature.[4]

## Early parliaments
Since ancient times, when societies were tribal, there were councils or a headman whose decisions were assessed by village elders. This is calledtribalism.[5]Some scholars suggest that in ancientMesopotamiathere was a primitive democratic government where the kings were assessed by council.[6]The same has been said about ancient India, where some form of deliberative assemblies existed, and therefore there was some form ofdemocracy.[7]However, these claims are not accepted by other scholars, who see these forms of government asoligarchies.[8][9][10][11][12]
Ancient Athenswas the cradle ofdemocracy.[13]TheAthenian assembly(ἐκκλησία,ekklesia) was the most important institution, and every free malecitizencould take part in the discussions. Slaves and women could not. However,Athenian democracywas not representative, but rather direct, and therefore theekklesiawas different from the parliamentary system.
TheRoman Republichadlegislative assemblies, who had the final say regarding the election of magistrates, the enactment of newstatutes, the carrying out of capital punishment, the declaration of war and peace, and the creation (or dissolution) of alliances.[14]TheRoman Senatecontrolled money, administration, and the details of foreign policy.[15]
Assemblies and councils were prevalent in Europe following the collapse of the Roman Empire. However, these assemblies are distinct from parliaments in several ways:
The Parliament of England is unique by retaining the same parliamentary structure from its establishment in 1265 to the present, almost without interruption.[17]

## Early forms of assembly
England has long had a tradition of a body of men who would assist and advise the king on important matters. Under theAnglo-Saxonkings, there was an advisory council, theWitenagemot. The name derives from theOld Englishƿitena ȝemōt, or witena gemōt, for "meeting of wise men". The first recorded act of a witenagemot wasthe law code issued by King Æthelberhtof Kent around 600, the earliest document which survives in sustained Old English prose; however, the Witan was certainly in existence long before then.[18]The Witan, along with the folkmoots (local assemblies), is an important ancestor of the modern English parliament.[19]
As part of theNorman Conquest, the new king,William I, did away with the Witenagemot, replacing it with aCuria Regis("King's Council"). Membership of the Curia was largely restricted to thetenants-in-chief, the few nobles who "rented" great estates directly from the king, along withecclesiastics. William brought to England thefeudal systemof his nativeNormandy, and sought the advice of the Curia Regis before making laws. This is the original body from which the Parliament, the higher courts of law, and thePrivy Counciland Cabinet descend. Of these, the legislature is formally the High Court of Parliament; judges sit in theSupreme Court of Judicature. Only the executive government is no longer conducted in a royal court.
Most historians date the emergence of a parliament with some degree of power, to which the throne had to defer, no later than the reign ofEdward I.[20]Like previous kings, Edward called leading nobles and church leaders to discuss government matters, especiallyfinanceandtaxation. A meeting in 1295 became known as theModel Parliamentbecause it set the pattern for later Parliaments. The significant difference between the Model Parliament and the earlier Curia Regis was the addition of the Commons: that is, the inclusion of elected representatives of rural landowners and of townsmen. In 1307, Edward agreed not to collect certain taxes without the "consent of the realm" through parliament. He also enlarged the court system.

## Magna Cartaand the model parliament
The tenants-in-chief often struggled for power with the ecclesiastics and the king. In 1215, they securedMagna CartafromKing John of England. This established that the king may not levy or collect any taxes (except the feudal taxes to which they were hitherto accustomed), save with the consent of a council. It was also established that the most important tenants-in-chief and ecclesiastics be summoned to the council by personal writs from the sovereign, and that all others be summoned to the council by general writs from thesheriffsof their counties. Modern government has its origins in the Curia Regis; parliament descends from the Great Council, later known as theparliamentum, established byMagna Carta.
During the reign ofKing Henry III(13th century),English Parliamentsincluded elected representatives from shires and towns. Thus these parliaments are considered forerunners of the modern parliament.[21]
In 1265,Simon de Montfort, then in rebellion against Henry III, summoneda parliamentof his supporters without royal authorisation. Thearchbishops,bishops,abbots,earls, andbaronswere summoned, as were twoknightsfrom each shire and twoburgessesfrom eachborough. Knights had been summoned to previous councils, but it was unprecedented for the boroughs to be represented. In 1295,Edward Iadopted De Montfort's ideas for representation and election in the so-called "Model Parliament". At first, eachestatedebated independently; by the reign ofEdward III, however, Parliament had grown closer to its modern form, with the legislative body having two separate chambers.

## Parliament under Henry VIII and Edward VI
The purpose and structure of Parliament in Tudor England underwent a significant transformation under the reign ofHenry VIII. Originally its methods were primarily medieval, and the monarch still possessed a form of inarguable dominion over its decisions. According to Elton, it wasThomas Cromwell, 1st Earl of Essex, then chief minister to Henry VIII, who initiated still other changes within parliament.
TheActs of Supremacyestablished the monarch as head of the Church of England.

## Civil War and beyond
The power of Parliament, in its relationship with the monarch, increased considerably after theCivil War, and again at theGlorious Revolution. It also provided the country with unprecedented stability. More stability, in turn, helped assure more effective management, organisation, and efficiency. Parliament printed statutes and devised a more coherentparliamentary procedure.
The rise of Parliament proved especially important in the sense that it limited the repercussions of dynastic complications that had so often plunged England into civil war. Parliament still ran the country even in the absence of suitable heirs to the throne, and its legitimacy as a decision-making body reduced the royal prerogatives of kings like Henry VIII and the importance of their whims. For example, Henry VIII could not simply establish supremacy by proclamation; he required Parliament to enforce statutes and add felonies and treasons. An important liberty for Parliament was its freedom of speech; Henry allowed anything to be spoken openly within Parliament and speakers could not face arrest – a fact which they exploited incessantly. Nevertheless, Parliament in Henry VIII's time offered up very little objection to the monarch's desires. Under his andEdward's reign, the legislative body complied willingly with the majority of the kings' decisions.
Much of this compliance stemmed from how the English viewed and traditionally understood authority. As Williams described it, "King and parliament were not separate entities, but a single body, of which the monarch was the senior partner and the Lords and the Commons the lesser, but still essential, members."[22]
Although its role in government had expanded significantly in the mid-16th century, the Parliament of England saw some of its most important gains in the 17th century. Aseries of conflictsbetween the Crown and Parliament culminated in the execution ofKing Charles Iin 1649. For a brief period, England became acommonwealth, withOliver Cromwellthe de facto ruler, with the title ofLord Protector. Frustrated with its decisions, Cromwell purged and suspended Parliament on several occasions.
A controversial figure notorious forhis actions in Ireland, Cromwell is nonetheless regarded as essential to the growth of democracy in England.[23]The years of the Commonwealth, coupled with therestoration of the monarchyin 1660 and the subsequentGlorious Revolution of 1688, helped reinforce and strengthen Parliament as an institution separate from the Crown.[24][25][26]

## Acts of Union
The Parliament of England met until it merged with theParliament of Scotlandunder theActs of Union. This union created the newParliament of Great Britainin 1707. The Parliament of the United Kingdom followed at the union with Ireland.

## France
Originally, there was only theParlement of Paris, born out of the Curia Regis in 1307, and located inside the medieval royal palace, now theParis Hall of Justice. The jurisdiction of theParliamentof Paris covered the entire kingdom. In the thirteenth century, judicial functions were added. In 1443, following the turmoil of theHundred Years' War, KingCharles VII of FrancegrantedLanguedocits ownparliamentby establishing theParliamentofToulouse, the firstparliamentoutside of Paris, whose jurisdiction extended over the most part of southern France. From 1443 until theFrench Revolutionseveral otherparliamentswere created in some provinces of France (Grenoble,Bordeaux).
All theparliamentscould issue regulatory decrees for the application of royal edicts or of customary practices; they could also refuse to register laws that they judged contrary to fundamental law or simply as being untimely. Parliamentary power in France was suppressed more so than in England as a result ofabsolutism, and parliaments were eventually overshadowed by the largerEstates General, up until theFrench Revolution, when the last Estates General transformed itself into aNational Assembly, a legislative body whose existence is independent of the royal power.

## Germanic and Nordic countries
Athingorting(Old NorseandIcelandic:þing; other modernScandinavian:ting,dinginDutch) was the governing assembly inGermanicsocieties, made up of the free men of the community and presided bylawspeakers.
The thing was the assembly of the free men of a country, province or ahundred(hundare/härad/herred). There were consequently, hierarchies of things, so that the local things were represented at the thing for a larger area, for a province or land. At the thing, disputes were solved and political decisions were made. The place for the thing was often also the place for public religious rites and for commerce.
The thing met at regular intervals, legislated, electedchieftainsandkings, and judged according to the law, which was memorised and recited by the "law speaker" (the judge).
The Icelandic, Faroese and Manx parliaments trace their origins back to theViking expansionoriginating from thepetty kingdoms of Norwayas well as Denmark, replicating Viking government systems in the conquered territories, such as those represented by theGulatingnear Bergen in western Norway:[citation needed]
Later national diets with chambers for different estates developed, e.g. in Sweden and in Finland (which was part of Sweden until 1809), each with aHouse of Knightsfor the nobility. In both these countries, the national parliaments are now calledriksdag(in Finland alsoeduskunta), a word used since the Middle Ages and equivalent of the German wordReichstag.
Today the term lives on in the official names of national legislatures and other institutions in the North Germanic[clarification needed]countries. InYorkshireand formerDanelawareas of England, which were subject to Norse invasion and settlement, thewapentakewas another name for the same institution.
In theLow Countries, the equivalent assembly developed into theStates-General(Staten-Generaal), which first met inBrugesin 1464 as a gathering of representatives from the provinces of theBurgundian Netherlands. Initially a feudal consultative body convened by theDuke of Burgundy, it evolved during theDutch Revolt(1568–1648) into asovereignassembly of theDutch Republic, and later became thebicameralparliament ofthe Netherlands.[32][33]

## Italy
TheSicilian ParliamentinPalermo, dating to 1097, evolved as the legislature of theKingdom of Sicily.[34][35]

## Hungary
The Diet of Hungary, or originally Parlamentum Publicum and Parlamentum Generale[36](Hungarian:Országgyűlés), became the supreme legislative institution in themedieval kingdom of Hungaryfrom the 1290s,[37]and in its successor states,Royal Hungaryand theHabsburg kingdom of Hungarythroughout theEarly Modern period. The name of the legislative body was originally "Parlamentum" during the Middle Ages, the "Diet" expression gained mostly in the Early Modern period.[38]It convened at regular intervals with interruptions during the period of 1527 to 1918, and again until 1946.
Some researchers have traced the roots of the Hungarian institution of national assemblies as far back as the 11th century. This based on documentary evidence that, on certain "important occasions" under the reigns ofKing Ladislaus IandKing Coloman"the Learned", assemblies were held on a national scale where both ecclesiastic and secular dignitaries made appearances.[39]The first exact written mention of the word "parlamentum" (Parliament) for the nationwide assembly originated during the reign ofKing Andrew IIin theGolden Bull of 1222, which reaffirmed the rights of the smaller nobles of the old and new classes of royal servants (servientes regis) against both the crown and the magnates, and to defend the rights of the whole nation against the crown by restricting the powers of the latter in certain fields and legalizing refusal to obey its unlawful/unconstitutional commands (the "ius resistendi").
The lesser nobles also began to present Andrew with grievances, a practice that evolved into the institution of the Hungarian Diet.
An institutionalized Hungarian parliament emerged during the 14th and 15th centuries. Beginning underKing Charles I, continuing under subsequent kings through into the reign ofKing Matthias I, the Diet was essentially convened by the king. However, under the rule of heavy handed kings like Louis the Great and during reign of the early absolutist Matthias Corvinus the parliaments were often convened to announce the royal decisions, and had no significant power of its own. Since the reign of the Jagiellonian dynasty, the parliament has regained most of its former power.

## Poland
According to theChroniclesofGallus Anonymus, the first legendary Polish ruler,Siemowit, who began thePiast dynasty, was chosen by an ancientwieccouncil. The idea of thewiecled to the development of the Polish parliament, theSejm, in around 1180.
The term "sejm" comes from an old Polish expression denoting a meeting of the populace. The power of early sejms grew between 1146 and 1295, when the power of individual rulers waned and various councils grew stronger. Since the 14th century irregular sejms (described in variousLatinsources ascontentio generalis, conventio magna, conventio solemna, parlamentum, parlamentum generale, dieta) have been convened by Poland's monarchs. From 1374, the king had to receive permission from that assembly to raisetaxesand the 1454Nieszawa Statutesgranted theszlachta(nobles) unprecedented concessions and authority. The General Sejm (Polishsejm generalnyorsejm walny), first convoked by theJohn I Albertin 1493 nearPiotrków, evolved from earlier regional and provincial meetings calledsejmiks. Simultaneously, theSenatewas founded on the earliercuria regis, convened at the king's discretion. Hence, the year 1493 marked the beginning of abicameral legislative body of government. With the subsequent development of PolishGolden Libertyin the next several decades, the Sejm's powers systematically increased. Poland was among the few countries in Europe where the parliament played an especially important role in its national identity as it contributed to the unity of the nation and the state.
The general parliament of thePolish–Lithuanian Commonwealthconsisted of three estates – the King of Poland, the Senate (consisting of Ministers, Palatines, Castellans and Roman Catholic Bishops) and the Chamber of Envoys comprising 170 nobles acting on behalf of their holdings as well as representatives of major cities, who did not possess any voting privileges. In 1573, a convocation sejm established anelective monarchyin the Commonwealth.

## Portugal
After its self-proclamation as an independent kingdom in 1139 byAfonso I of Portugal(followed by the recognition by theKingdom of Leónin theTreaty of Zamoraof 1143), the first historically established Cortes of theKingdom of Portugaloccurred in 1211 inCoimbraby initiative ofAfonso II of Portugal. These established the first general laws of the kingdom (Leis Gerais do Reino): protection of the king's property, stipulation of measures for the administration of justice and the rights of his subjects to be protected from abuses by royal officials, and confirming the clerical donations of the previous kingSancho I of Portugal.
After the conquest ofAlgarvein 1249, theKingdom of Portugalcompleted itsReconquista. In 1254 KingAfonso III of PortugalsummonedPortuguese CortesinLeiria, with the inclusion ofburghersfrom old and newly incorporated municipalities. This inclusion establishes the Cortes of Leiria of 1254 as the second sample of modernparliamentarismin the history of Europe (after theCortes of Leónin 1188). In these Cortes themonetagiowas introduced: a fixed sum was to be paid by the burghers to the Crown as a substitute for theseptennium(the traditional revision of the face value of coinage by the Crown every seven years). These Cortes also introducedstaplelaws on theDouro River, favouring the new royal city ofVila Nova de Gaiaat the expense of the old episcopal city of Porto.
ThePortuguese Cortesmet again under KingAfonso III of Portugalin 1256, 1261 and 1273, always by royal summon. Medieval Kings of Portugal continued to rely on small assemblies of notables, and only summoned the full Cortes on extraordinary occasions. A Cortes would be called if the king wanted to introduce new taxes, change some fundamental laws, announce significant shifts in foreign policy (e.g. ratify treaties), or settle matters of royal succession, issues where the cooperation and assent of the towns was thought necessary. Changing taxation (especially requesting war subsidies), was probably the most frequent reason for convening the Cortes. As the nobles and clergy were largely tax-exempt, setting taxation involved intensive negotiations between the royal council and theburgherdelegates at the Cortes.
Delegates (procuradores) not only considered the king's proposals, but, in turn, also used the Cortes to submit petitions of their own to the royal council on a myriad of matters, e.g. extending and confirming town privileges, punishing abuses of officials, introducing new price controls, constraints onJews, pledges on coinage, etc. The royal response to these petitions became enshrined as ordinances and statutes, thus giving the Cortes the aspect of a legislature. These petitions were originally referred to asaggravamentos(grievances) thenartigos(articles) and eventuallycapitulos(chapters). In a Cortes-Gerais, petitions were discussed and voted upon separately by each estate and required the approval of at least two of the three estates before being passed up to the royal council. The proposal was then subject to royal veto (either accepted or rejected by the king in its entirety) before becoming law.
Nonetheless, the exact extent of Cortes power was ambiguous. Kings insisted on their ancient prerogative to promulgate laws independently of the Cortes. The compromise, in theory, was that ordinances enacted in Cortes could only be modified or repealed by Cortes. But even that principle was often circumvented or ignored in practice.
The Cortes probably had their heyday in the 14th and 15th centuries, reaching their apex whenJohn I of Portugalrelied almost wholly upon the bourgeoisie for his power. For a period after the 1383–1385 Crisis, the Cortes were convened almost annually. But as time went on, they became less important. Portuguese monarchs, tapping into the riches of thePortuguese empireoverseas, grew less dependent on Cortes subsidies and convened them less frequently.John II(r.1481-1495) used them to break the high nobility, but dispensed with them otherwise.Manuel I(r.1495-1521) convened them only four times in his long reign. By the time ofSebastian(r.1554–1578), the Cortes was practically an irrelevance.
Curiously, the Cortes gained a new importance with the Iberian Union of 1581, finding a role as the representative of Portuguese interests to the newHabsburgmonarch. The Cortes played a critical role in the1640 Restoration, and enjoyed a brief period of resurgence during the reign ofJohn IV of Portugal(r.1640-1656). But by the end of the 17th century, it found itself sidelined once again. The last Cortes met in 1698, for the mere formality of confirming the appointment of Infante John (futureJohn V of Portugal) as the successor ofPeter II of Portugal. Thereafter, Portuguese kings ruled as absolute monarchs and no Cortes were assembled for over a century. This state of affairs came to an end with theLiberal Revolution of 1820, which set in motion the introduction of a new constitution, and a permanent and proper parliament, that however inherited the name of Cortes Gerais.

## Russia
Thezemsky sobor(Russian: зе́мский собо́р) was the first Russian parliament of the feudal Estates type, in the 16th and 17th centuries. The term roughly means assembly of the land.
It could be summoned either bytsar, orpatriarch, or theBoyar Duma. Three categories of population, comparable to the Estates-General of France but with the numbering of the first two Estates reversed, participated in the assembly:
The name of the parliament of nowadays Russian Federation is theFederal Assembly of Russia. The term for its lower house,State Duma(which is better known than the Federal Assembly itself, and is often mistaken for the entirety of the parliament) comes from the Russian wordдумать(dumat),  "to think". TheBoyar Dumawas an advisory council to thegrand princesandtsarsofMuscovy. The Duma was discontinued byPeter the Great, who transferred its functions to theGoverning Senatein 1711.

## Novgorod and Pskov
Thevechewas the highest legislature and judicial authority in the republic ofNovgoroduntil 1478. In its sister state,Pskov, a separate veche operated until 1510.
Since the Novgorod revolution of 1137 ousted the rulinggrand prince, the veche became the supreme state authority. After the reforms of 1410, the veche was restructured on a model similar to that ofVenice, becoming theCommonschamber of the parliament. An upperSenate-like Council of Lords was also created, with title membership for all former city magistrates. Some sources indicate that veche membership may have become full-time, and parliament deputies were now calledvechniks.  It is recounted that the Novgorod assembly could be summoned by anyone who rung the vechebell, although it is more likely that the common procedure was more complex. This bell was a symbol of republican sovereignty and independence. The whole population of the city—boyars, merchants, and common citizens—then gathered atYaroslav's Court. Separate assemblies could be held in the districts of Novgorod. In Pskov the veche assembled in the court of theTrinity cathedral.

## Roman Catholic Church
"Conciliarism" or the "conciliar movement", was a reform movement in the 14th and 15th centuryRoman Catholic Churchwhich held that final authority in spiritual matters resided with the Roman Church as corporation of Christians, embodied by ageneral church council, not with thepope. In effect, the movement sought – ultimately, in vain – to create an All-Catholic Parliament. Its struggle with the Papacy had many points in common with the struggle of parliaments in specific countries against the authority of Kings and other secular rulers.

## Scotland
From the 10th century theKingdom of Albawas ruled by chiefs (toisechs) and subkings (mormaers) under thesuzerainty, real or nominal, of aHigh King. Popular assemblies, as in Ireland, were involved in law-making, and sometimes in king-making, although the introduction oftanistry—naming a successor in the lifetime of a king—made the second less than common. These early assemblies cannot be considered "parliaments" in the later sense of the word, and were entirely separate from the later, Norman-influenced, institution.
TheParliament of Scotlandevolved during theMiddle Agesfrom the King's Council of Bishops and Earls. The unicameral parliament is first found on record, referred to as acolloquium, in 1235 atKirkliston(a village now inEdinburgh).
By the early fourteenth century the attendance of knights andfreeholdershad become important, and from 1326burghcommissioners attended. Consisting of the Three Estates; ofclerics, laytenants-in-chiefand burgh commissioners sitting in a single chamber, the Scottish parliament acquired significant powers over particular issues. Most obviously it was needed for consent fortaxation(although taxation was only raised irregularly in Scotland in themedievalperiod), but it also had a strong influence overjustice,foreign policy, war, and all manner of other legislation, whether political, ecclesiastical, social or economic. Parliamentary business was also carried out by "sister" institutions, before c. 1500 byGeneral Counciland thereafter by theConvention of Estates. These could carry out much business also dealt with by Parliament – taxation, legislation and policy-making – but lacked the ultimate authority of a full parliament.
The parliament, which is also referred to as the Estates of Scotland, the Three Estates, the Scots Parliament or the auld Scots Parliament (Eng:old), met until theActs of Unionmerged the Parliament of Scotland and theParliament of England, creating the newParliament of Great Britainin 1707.
Following the1997 Scottish devolution referendum, and the passing of theScotland Act 1998by theParliament of the United Kingdom, theScottish Parliamentwas reconvened on 1 July 1999, although with much more limited powers than its 18th-century predecessor. The parliament has sat since 2004 at its newly constructedScottish Parliament Buildingin Edinburgh, situated at the foot of theRoyal Mile, next to the royal palace ofHolyroodhouse.

## Spain
Although there are documented councils held in 873, 1020, 1050 and 1063, there was no representation of commoners. What is considered to be the first parliament, theCortes of León, was held in theKingdom of Leónin 1188.[40][41][42]According to the UNESCO, the Decreta of Leon of 1188 is the oldest documentary manifestation of the European parliamentary system. In addition, UNESCO granted the 1188 Cortes of Alfonso IX the title of "Memory of the World" and the city ofLeonhas been recognized as the "Cradle of Parliamentarism".[43][44]
After coming to power, KingAlfonso IX, facing an attack by his two neighbours,CastileandPortugal, decided to summon hisroyal council(Latin:curia regis). This was a medieval organization composed of aristocrats and bishops but because of the seriousness of the situation and the need to maximize political support, Alfonso IX took the decision to also call the representatives of the urban middle class from the most important cities of the kingdom to the assembly.[45]León's Cortes dealt with matters like the right toprivate property, the inviolability of domicile, the right to appeal to justice opposite the King and the obligation of the King to consult the Cortes before entering a war.[46]Prelates, nobles, and commoners met separately in the three estates of the Cortes. In this meeting, new laws were approved to protect commoners against the arbitrarities of nobles, prelates, and the king. This important set of laws is known as theCarta Magna Leonesa.
Following this event, new Cortes would appear in the other different territories that would make up Spain:Principality of Cataloniain 1192, theKingdom of Castilein 1250,Kingdom of Aragonin 1274,Kingdom of Valenciain 1283 andKingdom of Navarrein 1300.
After the union of the Kingdoms of Leon and Castile under theCrown of Castile, their Cortes were united as well in 1258. The Castilian Cortes had representatives from Burgos, Toledo, León, Seville, Córdoba, Murcia, Jaén, Zamora, Segovia, Ávila, Salamanca, Cuenca, Toro, Valladolid, Soria, Madrid, Guadalajara and Granada (after 1492).  The Cortes' assent was required to pass new taxes, and could also advise the king on other matters.  Thecomunero rebelsintended a stronger role for the Cortes, but were defeated by the forces ofHabsburgEmperorCharles Vin 1521. The Cortes maintained some power, however, though it became more of a consultative entity.  However, by the time ofKing Philip II, Charles's son, the Castilian Cortes had come under functionally complete royal control, with its delegates dependent on the Crown for their income.[47]
The Cortes of theCrown of Aragonkingdoms retained their power to control the king's spending with regard to the finances of those kingdoms. But after theWar of the Spanish Successionand the victory of another royal house – theBourbons– and KingPhilip V, their Cortes were suppressed (those ofAragonandValenciain 1707, and those ofCataloniaand theBalearic islandsin 1714).
The first Cortes representing the whole of Spain (and the Spanish empire of the day) assembled in 1812, inCádiz, where it operated as a government in exile as at that time most of the rest of Spain was in the hands ofNapoleon's army.

## Switzerland
TheFederal Diet of Switzerlandwas one of the longest-lived representative bodies in history, continuing from the 13th century to 1848.

## Ukraine
Stemming from the tribal assemblies of the ancient Slavs, theviche(from Proto-Slavonic *větje, meaning 'council', 'counsel' or 'talk') functioned not only as a form of self-organization in cities of medievalKievan Rusʹbut also as a form of protect against policies of the Princes.[48]The tradition of viche contributed to the culture of peaceful assemblies in contemporary Ukraine.[49][50]
TheSich Rada(council) was an institution ofCossack administrationfrom the 16th to the 18th century. With the establishment of theCossack Hetmanatein 1648, it was officially known as the General Military Council, orCossack Rada, until 1750.
TheCentral Council of Ukraine, or the Central Rada, founded on March 4, 1917, was the All-Ukrainian council of theUkrainian People's Republic, which declared its full state independence in theFourth Universal of the Ukrainian Central Councilin 1918. The contemporary Ukrainian parliament is called theVerkhovna Radaof Ukraine.

## Development of modern parliaments
The development of the modern concept of parliamentary government dates back to theKingdom of Great Britain(1707–1800).

## United Kingdom
TheParliament of Great Britainwas formed in 1707 by theActs of Unionthat replaced the former parliaments of England and Scotland. Afurther union in 1801united the Parliament of Great Britain and theParliament of Irelandinto aParliament of the United Kingdom. Through a series ofReform Actsin the 19th and 20th centuries, it became democratically elected.[51]
The British Parliament is often referred to as theMother of Parliaments(in fact a misquotation ofJohn Bright, who remarked in 1865 that "England is the Mother of Parliaments") because the British Parliament has been the model for most other parliamentary systems, and itsActshave created many other parliaments.[52]Many nations with parliaments have to some degree emulated the British "three-tier" model known as theWestminster system. Most countries in Europe and theCommonwealthhave similarly organised parliaments with a largely ceremonialhead of statewho formally opens and closes parliament, a large elected lower house and a smaller, upper house.[53][54]The Parliament of the United Kingdom has been described as characterised by the stability of its governing institutions and its capacity to absorb change.[55]
In the United Kingdom, Parliament consists of theHouse of Commons, theHouse of Lords, and theMonarch. The House of Commons is composed of 650 members who are directly elected by British citizens to represent single-member constituencies. The leader of a party that wins more than half the seats, or less than half but is able to gain the support of smaller parties to achieve a majority in the house, is invited by the Monarch to form a government. The House of Lords is a body of long-serving, unelected members:Lords Temporal(92 of whom inherit their titles, of whom 90 are elected internally by members of the House to lifetime seats), 588 of whom have been appointed to lifetime seats, andLords Spiritual(26 bishops, who are part of the house while they remain in office).
Legislation can originate from either the Lords or the Commons. It is voted on in several distinct stages, calledreadings, in each house. First reading is merely a formality. Second reading is where the bill as a whole is considered. Third reading is detailed consideration of clauses of the bill.
In addition to the three readings a bill also goes through a committee stage where it is considered in great detail. Once the bill has been passed by one house it goes to the other and essentially repeats the process. If after the two sets of readings, there are disagreements between the versions that the two houses passed it is returned to the first house for consideration of the amendments made by the second. If it passes through the amendment stageRoyal Assentis granted and the bill becomes law as anAct of Parliament.
The House of Lords is the less powerful of the two houses as a result of theParliament Acts 1911 and 1949. These Acts removed the veto power of the Lords over a great deal of legislation. If a bill is certified by theSpeaker of the House of Commonsas amoney bill(i.e. acts raising taxes and similar) then the Lords can only block it for a month. If an ordinary bill originates in the Commons the Lords can only block it for a maximum of onesession of Parliament. The exceptions to this rule are things like bills to prolong the life of a Parliament beyond five years.
In addition to functioning as the second chamber of Parliament, the House of Lords was also the final court ofappealfor much of the law of the United Kingdom—a combination of judicial and legislative function that recalls its origin in the Curia Regis. This changed in October 2009 when theSupreme Court of the United Kingdomopened and acquired the former jurisdiction of the House of Lords.
Since 1999, there has been aScottish ParliamentinEdinburgh, and, since 2020, aSenedd—or Welsh Parliament—inCardiff. However, these national, unicameral legislatures do not have complete power over their respectivecountries of the United Kingdom, holding only those powers devolved to them by Westminster from 1997. All three cannot legislate on defence issues or currency, whilst Northern Ireland and Wales cannot legislate on national taxation (e.g. VAT, or Income Tax), however, following theScotland Act 2016, the Scottish Parliament has some legislative control over aspects of taxation including some elements ofincome tax, Air Departure Tax and Aggregates Tax.[56][57]
Additionally, the bodies in Northern Ireland and Wales can be theoretically dissolved, at any given time, by the British Parliament without the consent of the devolved government. The Scotland Act 2016 made both the Scottish Parliament andScottish Governmentpermanent components of the constitution in Scotland, and can only be dissolved following a vote in a legally binding referendum if a majority voted in favour of its dissolution.[57]

## Sweden
InSweden, the half-century period of parliamentary government beginning withCharles XII's death in 1718 and ending withGustav III'sself-coupin 1772 is known as theAge of Liberty. During this period,civil rightswere expanded and power shifted from the monarch to parliament.
Whilesuffragedid not become universal, the taxed peasantry was represented in Parliament, although with little influence and commoners without taxed property had no suffrage at all.

## Poland
Changes in Poland's internal situation in the 1980s led to the Round Table Talks which ended in the signing of the famous Round Table Agreement on 5 April 1989. The Agreement spearheaded the evolutionary transformation of the country's political system; independence was regained once again. The document Position on Political Reforms provided grounds for amending the Constitution. The amended Constitution restored the office of the President of the Polish People's Republic and the Senate – both to be elected in free and democratic elections. In the Sejm, the opposition was allocated 35% of the mandates. Thus the so called "contract" elections could not be fully democratic. The Sejm (first chamber) became superior to the Senate (second chamber). In addition, the institution of National Assembly was established, consisting of the Sejm and the Senate sitting jointly to elect the President of the Polish People's Republic. A declaration of the Solidarity Citizens' Committee heralded the prompt enactment of a new, democratic constitution and electoral law. As a result of Solidarity's success in elections to the Sejm and the Senate, profound reforms of the political system were undertaken by adopting an amendment to the Constitution on 29 December 1989. In the Constitution, the Republic of Poland was defined as a democratic state ruled by law. As the provisional constitution lasted too long, it was decided to adopt a provisional regulation in the form of the so called Small Constitution. The President signed it on 17 October 1992. The Small Constitution regulated above all the relationship between the executive and legislative powers, on the basis of the doctrine of separation of powers. A bicameral parliament was maintained.
After long years of legislative work, on 2 April 1997, the National Assembly adopted The Constitution of the Republic of Poland. It entered into force on 17 October 1997. The new Constitution introduced a "rationalised" parliamentary-cabinet system in Poland. It is the first Constitution of the Third Republic. That was the first Constitution of the Third Republic. The act defined the position of the Sejm and the Senate within the system without using the term "parliament". It adopted the doctrine of separation of powers, which provided for a balance between the legislative and executive powers. In practice the binding provisions of the Constitution ensure the supremacy of the legislative power. Both chambers are autonomous bodies, independent of each other, with their own powers. The Constitution retained the principle of bicameralism of the legislature. The Sejm and the Senate sitting jointly constitute the National Assembly. Characteristically, the new Constitution conferred very extensive powers on the Sejm. On the other hand, the powers of the Senate are limited, as in the Constitutions of 1921 and 1992.

## Parliamentary system
Many parliaments are part of aparliamentary systemof government, in which theexecutiveis constitutionally answerable to the parliament from the genetic moment of the birth of Government (Motion of confidence), to the final moment of his termination (Motion of no confidence), through all the commitments that can be added to thegovernment contractfrom time to time throughmotionsandresolutions.[58]Some restrict the use of the wordparliamentto parliamentary systems, while others use the word for any elected legislative body. Parliaments usually consist ofchambersorhouses, and are usually eitherbicameralorunicameralalthough more complex models exist, or have existed (seeTricameralism).
In some parliamentary systems, theprime ministeris a member of the parliament (e.g.in the United Kingdom), whereas in others they are not (e.g.in the Netherlands). They are commonly the leader of the majority party in the lower house of parliament, but only hold the office as long as the "confidence of the house" is maintained. If members of the lower house lose faith in the leader for whatever reason, they can call avote of no confidenceand force the prime minister to resign. In case of general discontent with the head of government, their replacement can be made very smoothly without all the complications that it represents in the case of a presidential system, where impeachment would be needed to force out the head of government, which process is supposed to be a purely legal, not political matter (although it often becomespoliticized).
The parliamentary system can be contrasted with apresidential system, such as theAmerican congressional system, which operates under a stricterseparation of powers, whereby the executive does not form part of, nor is it appointed by, the parliamentary or legislative body. In such a system, congresses do not select or dismissheads of governments, and governments cannot request an early dissolution as may be the case for parliaments. Some states, such asFrance, have asemi-presidential systemwhich falls between parliamentary and congressional systems, combining a powerful head of state (president) with a head of government, the prime minister, who is responsible to parliament.
In some unconventional parliamentary systems, the prime minister is elected by parliament (this was previously the case inIsrael), or the president (head of state) also serves as head of government, and answers to parliament as a prime minister (parliamentary system with  an executive president). With notable exceptions, in most parliamentary republics the president (head of state) is not actually elected by the parliament, rather most commonly bypopular vote. The president may have a formal or informal role as a check on the parliament, although this is less prevalent in the case when parliament elects the president.

## Australia
Australia's States and territories:

## Belgium
In the federal (bicameral) kingdom of Belgium, there is a curious asymmetrical constellation serving as directly elected legislatures for three "territorial"regions—Flanders(Dutch),Brussels(bilingual, certain peculiarities of competence, also the only region not comprising any of the 10 provinces) andWallonia(French)—and three culturalcommunities—Flemish (Dutch, competent in Flanders and for the Dutch-speaking inhabitants of Brussels), Francophone (French, for Wallonia and for Francophones in Brussels) and German (for speakers of that language in a few designated municipalities in the east of the Walloon Region, living alongside Francophones but under two different regimes):

## Canada
Canada's provinces and territories:

## Germany
Except for thecity-statesofBerlin,BremenandHamburg, where thecity councilis also thestate parliament, all state parliaments are calledLandtag: