## Phosphorus
Phosphorusis achemical element; it hassymbolPandatomic number15. All elemental forms of phosphorus are highlyreactiveand are therefore never found in nature. Elemental phosphorus can be prepared artificially, the two most commonallotropesbeingwhite phosphorusandred phosphorus. With31Pas its only stableisotope, phosphorus has an occurrence inEarth's crustof about 0.1%, generally asphosphate rock. A member of thepnictogenfamily, phosphorus readily forms a wide variety oforganicandinorganiccompounds, with as its mainoxidation states+5, +3 and −3.
The isolation of white phosphorus in 1669 byHennig Brandmarked the scientific community's first discovery of an element since antiquity. The name phosphorus is a reference to thegod of the Morning starinGreek mythology, inspired by the faint glow of white phosphorus when exposed tooxygen. This property is also at the origin of the termphosphorescence, meaning glow after illumination, although white phosphorus itself does not exhibit phosphorescence, butchemiluminescencecaused by itsoxidation. Its hightoxicitymakes exposure to white phosphorus very dangerous, while itsflammabilityandpyrophoricitycan be weaponised in the form ofincendiaries. Red phosphorus is less dangerous and is used inmatchesandfire retardants.
Most industrial production of phosphorus is focused on the mining and transformation of phosphate rock intophosphoric acidforphosphate-basedfertilisers. Phosphorus is an essential and oftenlimiting nutrientfor plants, and while natural levels are normally maintained over time by thephosphorus cycle, it is too slow for the regeneration of soil that undergoesintensive cultivation. As a consequence, these fertilisers are vital to modern agriculture. The leading producers of phosphate ore in 2024 were China, Morocco, the United States and Russia, with two-thirds of the estimated exploitable phosphate reserves worldwide in Morocco alone. Other applications of phosphorus compounds includepesticides,food additives, anddetergents.
Phosphorus is essential to all known forms oflife, largely throughorganophosphates, organic compounds containing the phosphate ionPO3−4as afunctional group. These includeDNA,RNA,ATP, andphospholipids, complex compounds fundamental to the functioning of allcells. The main component of bones and teeth,bone mineral, is a modified form ofhydroxyapatite, itself a phosphorus mineral.

## History
Phosphorus was thefirst element to be "discovered", in the sense that it was not known since ancient times.[12]The discovery is credited to theHamburgalchemistHennig Brandin 1669, who was attempting to create the fabledphilosopher's stone.[13]To this end, he experimented withurine, which contains considerable quantities of dissolved phosphates from normal metabolism.[14]By letting the urine rot (a step later discovered to be unnecessary),[15]boiling it down to a paste, thendistillingit at a high temperature and leading the resulting vapours through water, he obtained a white, waxy substance that glowed in the dark and burned brilliantly. He named it inLatin:phosphorus mirabilis,lit.'miraculous bearer of light'. The word phosphorus itself (Ancient Greek:Φωσφόρος,romanized:Phōsphoros,lit.'light-bearer') originates fromGreek mythology, where it references thegod of the morning star, also known as the planetVenus.[14][16]
Brand at first tried to keep the method secret,[17]but later sold the recipe for 200thalerstoJohann Daniel Kraft[de]fromDresden.[14]Kraft toured much of Europe with it, includingLondon, where he met withRobert Boyle. The crucial fact that the substance was made from urine was eventually found out, andJohann Kunckelwas able to reproduce it in Sweden in 1678. In 1680, Boyle also managed to make phosphorus and published the method of its manufacture.[14]He was the first to use phosphorus to ignitesulfur-tipped wooden splints, forerunners of modern matches,[18]and also improved the process by using sand in the reaction:
Boyle's assistantAmbrose Godfrey-Hanckwitzlater made a business of the manufacture of phosphorus.
In 1777,Antoine Lavoisierrecognised phosphorus as an element afterJohan Gottlieb GahnandCarl Wilhelm Scheeleshowed in 1769 thatcalcium phosphateis found in bones by obtaining elemental phosphorus frombone ash.[10]Bone ash subsequently became the primary industrial source of phosphorus and remained so until the 1840s.[19]The process consisted of several steps.[20][21]First, grinding up the bones into their constituenttricalcium phosphateand treating it withsulfuric acid:
Then, dehydrating the resultingmonocalcium phosphate:
Finally, mixing the obtained calciummetaphosphatewith groundcoalorcharcoalin an iron pot, and distilling phosphorus vapour out of aretort:
This way, two-thirds of the phosphorus was turned into white phosphorus while one-third remained in the residue as calciumorthophosphate. Thecarbon monoxideproduced during the reaction process was burnt off in aflare stack.
In 1609Inca Garcilaso de la Vegawrote the bookComentarios Realesin which he described many of the agricultural practices of the Incas prior to the arrival of the Spaniards and introduced the use ofguanoas afertiliser. As Garcilaso described, the Incas near the coast harvested guano.[22]In the early 1800sAlexander von Humboldtintroduced guano as a source of agricultural fertiliser to Europe after having discovered it in exploitable quantities on islands off the coast ofSouth America. It has been reported that, at the time of its discovery, the guano on some islands was over 30 meters deep.[23]The guano had previously been used by theMochepeople as a source of fertiliser by mining it and transporting it back toPeruby boat. International commerce in guano did not start until after 1840.[23]By the start of the 20th century guano had been nearly completely depleted and was eventually overtaken with the discovery of methods of production ofsuperphosphate.
Early matchesused white phosphorus in their composition, and were very dangerous due to both its toxicity and the way the match was ignited. The first striking match with a phosphorus head was invented byCharles Sauriain 1830. These matches (and subsequent modifications) were made with heads of white phosphorus, an oxygen-releasing compound (potassium chlorate,lead dioxide, or sometimesnitrate), and a binder. They were poisonous to the workers in manufacture, exposure to the vapours causing  severenecrosisof the bones of the jaw, known as "phossy jaw".[24]Additionally, they were sensitive to storage conditions, toxic if ingested, and hazardous when accidentally ignited on a rough surface.[25][26]The very high risks for match workers was at the source of several notable early cases ofindustrial action, such as the 1888 LondonMatchgirls' strike.
The discovery of red phosphorus allowed for the development of matches that were both much safer to use and to manufacture, leading to the gradual replacement of white phosphorus in matches. Additionally, around 1900 French chemists Henri Sévène and Emile David Cahen invented the modern strike-anywhere match, wherein the white phosphorus was replaced by phosphorus sesquisulfide (P4S3), a non-toxic and non-pyrophoric compound that ignites under friction. For a time these safer strike-anywhere matches were quite popular but in the long run they were superseded by the modern red phosphorus-based safety match. Following the implementation of these new manufacturing methods, production of white phosphorus matches was banned in several countries between 1872 and 1925,[27]and an internationaltreatyto this effect was signed following theBerne Convention (1906).[28]
Phosphate rock, which usually contains calcium phosphate, was first used in 1850 to make phosphorus. With the introduction of thesubmerged-arc furnace for phosphorus productionbyJames Burgess Readmanin 1888[29](patented 1889),[30]the use of bone-ash became obsolete.[21][14]After the depletion of world guano sources about the same time, mineral phosphates became the major source of phosphate fertiliser production. Phosphate rock production greatly increased after World War II, and remains the primary global source of phosphorus and phosphorus chemicals today.
The electric furnace method allowed production to increase to the point where it became possible thatwhite phosphorus could be weaponised in war. InWorld War I, it was used inincendiary ammunition,smoke screensandtracer ammunition. A special incendiary bullet was developed to shoot athydrogen-filledZeppelinsover Britain (hydrogen being highlyflammable).[21]
DuringWorld War II,Molotov cocktailsmade of phosphorus dissolved inpetrolwere distributed in Britain to specially selected civilians as part of thepreparations for a potential invasion. The United States also developed the M15 white-phosphorus hand grenade, a precursor to theM34 grenade, while the British introduced the similarNo 77 grenade. These multipurpose grenades were mostly used for signaling and smoke screens, although they were also efficientanti-personnel weapons.[31]The difficulty of extinguishing burning phosphorus and the very severe burns it causes had a strong psychological impact on the enemy.[32]Phosphorusincendiary bombswere used on a large scale, notably todestroy Hamburg, the place where the "miraculous bearer of light" was first discovered.[16]

## Isotopes
There are 22 knownisotopesof phosphorus, ranging from26Pto47P.[11]Only31Pis stable and, therefore, has 100% abundance. Thenuclear spinof 1/2 and high abundance of31Pmakephosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic resonancespectroscopy a very useful analytical tool in studies of phosphorus-containing samples.
Tworadioactive isotopesof phosphorus have half-lives suitable for biological scientific experiments, and are used as radioactive tracers in biochemical laboratories.[33]These are:
The high-energy beta particles from32Ppenetrate skin andcorneasand any32Pingested, inhaled, or absorbed is readily incorporated into bone andnucleic acids. For these reasons, personnel working with32Pis required to wear lab coats, disposable gloves, and safety glasses, and avoid working directly over open containers.Monitoringpersonal, clothing, and surface contamination is also required. The high energy of the beta particles gives rise to secondary emission ofX-raysviaBremsstrahlung(braking radiation) in dense shielding materials such as lead. Therefore, the radiation must beshieldedwith low density materials such as water, acrylic or other plastic.[34]

## Atomic properties
A phosphorus atom has 15 electrons, 5 of which arevalence electrons. This results in theelectron configuration1s22s22p63s23p3, often simplified as [Ne]3s23p3, omitting thecore electronswhich have a configuration equivalent to thenoble gasof the precedingperiod, in this caseneon. The molarionisation energiesof these five electrons are 1011.8, 1907, 2914.1, 4963.6 and 6273.9 kJ⋅mol−1.
Phosphorus is a member of thepnictogens(also calledgroup15) andperiod 3 elements, and many of its chemical properties can be inferred from its position on theperiodic tableas a result ofperiodic trends. Likenitrogen,arsenicandantimony, its mainoxidation statesare −3, +3 and +5, with every one in-between less common but known. Phosphorus shows as expected moreelectronegativitythansiliconand arsenic, less thansulfurand nitrogen, but also notably less thancarbon, affecting the nature and properties of P–C bonds. It is the element with the lowestatomic numberto exhibithypervalence, meaning that it can form morebondsper atom that would normally be permitted by theoctet rule.

## Allotropes
Phosphorus has severalallotropesthat exhibit very diverse properties.[35]The most useful and therefore common iswhite phosphorus, followed byred phosphorus. The two other main allotropes, violet and black phosphorus, have either a more fundamental interest or specialised applications. Many other allotropes have been theorised and synthesised, with the search for new materials an active area of research.[36]Commonly mentioned "yellow phosphorus" is not an allotrope, but a result of the gradual degradation of white phosphorus into red phosphorus, accelerated by light and heat. This causes white phosphorus that is aged or otherwise impure (e.g. weapons-grade) to appear yellow.
White phosphorus is a soft, waxymolecular solidthat is insoluble in water.[32]It is also very toxic, highlyflammableandpyrophoric, igniting in air at about 30 °C (303 K).[14]Structurally, it is composed ofP4tetrahedra. The nature of bonding in a givenP4tetrahedron can be described byspherical aromaticityor cluster bonding, that is the electrons are highlydelocalized. This has been illustrated by calculations of the magnetically induced currents, which sum up to 29 nA/T, much more than in the archetypicalaromaticmoleculebenzene(11 nA/T).[37]TheP4molecule in the gas phase has a P-P bond length of 2.1994(3) Å as determined bygas electron diffraction.[37]White phosphorus exists in two crystalline forms named α (alpha) and β (beta), differing in terms of the relative orientation of the constituentP4tetrahedra.[38][39]The α-form is most stable at room temperature and has acubic crystal structure. When cooled down to 195.2 K (−78.0 °C) it transforms into the β-form, turning into anhexagonal crystal structure. When heated up, the tetrahedral structure is conserved after melting at 317.3 K (44.2 °C) and boiling at 553.7 K (280.6 °C), before facingthermal decompositionat 1,100 K (830 °C) where it turns into gaseousdiphosphorus(P2).[40]This molecule contains a triple bond and is analogous toN2; it can also be generated as a transient intermediate in solution by thermolysis of organophosphorus precursor reagents.[41]At still higher temperatures,P2dissociates into atomic P.[32]
When exposed to air, white phosphorus faintly glows green and blue due tooxidation, a phenomenon best visible in the dark. This reaction with oxygen takes place at the surface of the solid (or liquid) phosphorus, forming the short-lived moleculesHPOandP2O2that both emit visible light.[42]However, in a pure-oxygen environment phosphorus does not glow at all, with the oxidation happening only in a range ofpartial pressures.[43]Derived from this phenomenon, the termsphosphorsandphosphorescencehave been loosely used to describe substances that shine in the dark. However, phosphorus itself is not phosphorescent butchemiluminescent, since it glows due to a chemical reaction and not the progressive reemission of previously absorbed light.[15]
Red phosphorus ispolymericin structure. It can be viewed as a derivative ofP4wherein one P-P bond is broken and one additional bond is formed with the neighbouring tetrahedron, resulting in chains ofP21molecules linked byvan der Waals forces.[44]Red phosphorus may be formed by heating white phosphorus to 250 °C (523 K) in the absence of air or by exposing it to sunlight.[14]In this form phosphorus isamorphous, but can be crystallised upon further heating into violet phosphorus or fibrous red phosphorus depending on the reaction conditions. Red phosphorus is therefore not an allotrope in the strictest sense of the term, but rather an intermediate between other crystalline allotropes of phosphorus, and consequently most of its properties have a range of values. Freshly prepared, bright red phosphorus is highly reactive and ignites at about 300 °C (573 K).[45]After prolonged heating or storage, the color darkens; the resulting product is more stable and does not spontaneously ignite in air.[46]
Violet phosphorus or α-metallic phosphorus can be produced by day-long annealing of red phosphorus above 550 °C (823 K). In 1865,Johann Wilhelm Hittorfdiscovered that when phosphorus was recrystallised from moltenlead, a red/purple form is obtained. Therefore, this form is sometimes known as "Hittorf's phosphorus" .[47]
Black phosphorus or β-metallic phosphorus is the least reactive allotrope and the thermodynamically stable form below 550 °C (823 K). In appearance, properties, and structure, it resemblesgraphite, being black and flaky, a conductor of electricity, and having puckered sheets of linked atoms.[48][49][50]It is obtained by heating white phosphorus under high pressures (about 12,000 standard atmospheres or 1.2 gigapascals). It can also be produced at ambient conditions using metal salts, e.g. mercury, as catalysts.[51]Single-layer black phosphorus is calledphosphorene, and is therefore predictably analogous tographene.

## Natural occurrence
Phosphorus has a concentration in theEarth's crustof about one gram per kilogram (for comparison, copper is found at about 0.06 grams per kilogram). It is not found free in nature, but is widely distributed in manyminerals, usually as phosphates. Inorganicphosphate rock, which is partially made ofapatite, is today the chief commercial source of this element.
In 2013, astronomers detected phosphorus inCassiopeia A, which confirmed that this element is produced insupernovaeas a byproduct ofsupernova nucleosynthesis. The phosphorus-to-ironratio in material from thesupernova remnantcould be up to 100 times higher than in theMilky Wayin general.[52]In 2020, astronomers analysedALMAandROSINAdata from the massivestar-forming regionAFGL 5142, to detect phosphorus-bearing molecules and how they could have been carried in comets to the early Earth.[53]

## Phosphoric acids
The most prevalent compounds of phosphorus are derivatives of phosphate (PO3−4), a tetrahedral anion.[54]Phosphate is the conjugate base of phosphoric acid, which is produced on a massive scale for use in fertilisers. Being triprotic, phosphoric acid converts stepwise to three conjugate bases:
Food-gradephosphoric acid(additiveE338[55]) is used to acidify foods and beverages such as variouscolasand jams, providing a tangy or sour taste.[21]The phosphoric acid also serves as apreservative.[56]Soft drinks containing phosphoric acid, includingCoca-Cola, are sometimes calledphosphate sodasor phosphates. Phosphoric acid in soft drinks has the potential to cause dental erosion,[57]as well as contribute to the formation ofkidney stones, especially in those who have had kidney stones previously.[58]

## Metal salts
With metalcations, phosphate forms a variety of salts. These solids are polymeric, featuring P-O-M linkages. When the metal cation has a charge of 2+ or 3+, the salts are generally insoluble, hence they exist as common minerals. Many phosphate salts are derived from hydrogen phosphate (HPO2−4).
Calcium phosphates in particular are widespread compounds with many applications. Among them, they are used to improve the characteristics of processed meat andcheese, inbaking powder, and in toothpaste.[21]Two of the most relevant among them aremonocalcium phosphate, anddicalcium phosphate.

## Polyphosphates
Phosphate exhibits a tendency to form chains and rings containing P-O-P bonds. Many polyphosphates are known, includingATP. Polyphosphates arise by dehydration of hydrogen phosphates such asHPO2−4andH2PO−4. For example, the industrially important pentasodium triphosphate (also known assodium tripolyphosphate, STPP) is produced industrially by the megatonne by thiscondensation reaction:
Sodium triphosphate is used in laundry detergents in some countries, but banned for this use in others.[46]This compoundsoftensthe water to enhance the performance of the detergents and to prevent pipe and boiler tubecorrosion.[59]

## Oxoacids
Phosphorusoxoacidsare extensive, often commercially important, and sometimes structurally complicated. They all have acidic protons bound to oxygen atoms, some have nonacidic protons that are bonded directly to phosphorus and some contain phosphorus–phosphorus bonds.[32]Although many oxoacids of phosphorus are formed, only nine are commercially important. Among them, hypophosphorous, phosphorous and orthophosphoric acid are particularly important.

## Oxides and sulfides
Phosphorus pentoxide(P4O10) is theacid anhydrideof phosphoric acid, but several intermediates between the two are known. This waxy white solid reacts vigorously with water. Similarly,phosphorus trioxide(P4O6, also called tetraphosphorus hexoxide) is the anhydride ofP(OH)3, the minor tautomer of phosphorous acid. The structure ofP4O6is like that ofP4O10without the terminal oxide groups. Mixed oxyhalides and oxyhydrides of phosphorus(III) are almost unknown. Meanwhile, phosphorus forms a wide range of sulfides, where the phosphorus can be in P(V), P(III) or other oxidation states. However, only two of them are commercially significant.Phosphorus pentasulfide(P4S10) has a structure analogous toP4O10, and is used in the manufacture of additives and pesticides.[60]The three-fold symmetricPhosphorus sesquisulfide(P4S3) is used instrike-anywhere matches.

## Halides
Phosphorushalidescan have as oxidation state +3 in the case of trihalides and +5 for pentahalides andchalcoalides, but also +2 for disphosphorus tetrahalides. All four symmetrical trihalides are well known: gaseousPF3, the yellowish liquidsPCl3andPBr3, and the solidPI3. These materials are moisture sensitive, hydrolysing to givephosphorous acid. The trichloride, a common reagent used for the manufacture of pesticides, is produced by chlorination of white phosphorus. The trifluoride is produced from the trichloride by halide exchange.PF3is toxic because it binds tohaemoglobin.
Most phosphorus pentahalides are common compounds.PF5is a colourless gas and the molecules have atrigonal bipyramidalgeometry. With fluoride, it formsPF−6, ananionthat isisoelectronicwithSF6.PCl5is a colourless solid which has an ionic formulation ofPCl+4PCl−6, but adopts a trigonal bipyramidal geometry when molten or in the vapour phase.[32]Both the pentafluoride and the pentachloride areLewis acids. Meanwhile,PBr5is an unstable solid formulated asPBr+4Br−.PI5is not known.[32]
The most important phosphorusoxyhalideisphosphorus oxychloride(POCl3), which is approximately tetrahedral. It is prepared fromPCl3and used in the manufacture of plasticizers. Phosphorus can also form thiohalides such asPSCl3, and in rare cases selenohalides.

## Nitrides
The PN moleculephosphorus mononitrideis considered unstable, but is a product of crystallinetriphosphorus pentanitridedecomposition at 1,100 K (830 °C). Similarly,H2PNis considered unstable, and phosphorus nitride halogens likeF2PN,Cl2PN,Br2PN, andI2PNoligomerise into cyclicpolyphosphazenes. For example, compounds of the formula(PNCl2)nexist mainly as rings such as thetrimerhexachlorophosphazene. The phosphazenes arise by treatment of phosphorus pentachloride with ammonium chloride:
When the chloride groups are replaced byalkoxide(RO−), a family of polymers is produced with potentially useful properties.[61]

## Phosphides and phosphine
A wide variety of compounds which contain the containing the phosphide ionP3−exist, both withmain-group elementsand withmetals. They often exhibit complex structures, where phosphorus has the −3 oxidation state. Metal phosphides arise by reaction of metals with red phosphorus. Thealkali metals(group 1) andalkaline earth metals(group 2) can also form compounds such asNa3P7. These compounds react with water to formphosphine.[32]Some phosphide minerals are also known, like(Fe,Ni)2Pand(Fe,Ni)3P, but they are very rare on Earth, most instances occurring iniron-nickel meteorites.
Phosphine (PH3) and its organic derivatives are structural analogues ofammonia(NH3), but the bond angles at phosphorus are closer to 90° for phosphine and its organic derivatives. It is an ill-smelling and toxic gas, produced by hydrolysis ofcalcium phosphide(Ca3P2). Unlike ammonia, phosphine is oxidised by air. Phosphine is also far less basic than ammonia. Other phosphines are known which contain chains of up to nine phosphorus atoms and have the formulaPnHn+2.[32]The highly flammable gasdiphosphine(P2H4) is an analogue ofhydrazine.

## Phosphines, phosphites and organophosphates
Compounds with P-C and P-O-C bonds are often classified as organophosphorus compounds. They are widely used commercially. TheP3+serves as a source ofPCl3in routes to organophosphorus(III) compounds. For example, it is the precursor totriphenylphosphine:
Treatment of phosphorus trihalides with alcohols andphenolsgives phosphites, e.g.triphenylphosphite:
Similar reactions occur forphosphorus oxychloride, affordingtriphenylphosphate:
Some organophosphates are used as flame retardants.[62]Among them,tricresyl phosphateand2-ethylhexyl diphenyl phosphateare alsoplasticisers, making these two properties useful in the production of non-flammable plastic products and derivatives.[32][63]
While many organic compounds of phosphorus are required for life, some are highly toxic. A wide range of organophosphorus compounds are used for their toxicity aspesticidesandweaponisedasnerve agents.[32]Some notable examples includesarin,VXorTabun. Fluorophosphateesters(like sarin) are among the most potentneurotoxinsknown.

## Thioesters
Symmetric phosphorus(III) trithioesters (e.g.P(SMe)3) can be produced from the reaction ofwhite phosphorusand the correspondingdisulfide, or phosphorus(III) halides andthiolates. Unlike the corresponding esters, they do not undergo a variant of theMichaelis-Arbuzov reactionwith electrophiles.  Instead, they revert to another phosphorus(III) compound through asulfoniumintermediate.[64]

## Phosphorus(I) and phosphorus(II)
These compounds generally feature P–P bonds.[32]Examples include catenated derivatives of phosphine and organophosphines. Compounds containing P=P double bonds have also been observed, although they are rare.

## Cells
Inorganic phosphorus in the form of the phosphatePO3−4is required for all known forms oflife.[65]Phosphorus plays a major role in the structural framework ofDNAandRNA. Living cells use phosphate to transport cellular energy withadenosine triphosphate(ATP), necessary for every cellular process that uses energy. ATP is also important forphosphorylation, a key regulatory event in cells. Every living cell is encased in a membrane that separates it from its surroundings. Cellular membranes are composed of a phospholipid matrix and proteins, typically in the form of a bilayer.Phospholipidsare derived fromglycerolwith two of the glycerol hydroxyl (OH) protons replaced by fatty acids as anester, and the third hydroxyl proton has been replaced with phosphate bonded to another alcohol.[66]

## Bone and teeth enamel
The main component of bone ishydroxyapatiteas well as amorphous forms of calcium phosphate, possibly including carbonate. Hydroxyapatite is the main component of tooth enamel.Water fluoridationenhances the resistance of teeth to decay by the partial conversion of this mineral to the still harder materialfluorapatite:[32]
An average adult human contains about 0.7 kilograms (1.5 lb) of phosphorus, about 85–90% in bones and teeth in the form ofapatite, and the remainder in soft tissues and extracellular fluids. The phosphorus content increases from about 0.5% by mass in infancy to 0.65–1.1% by mass in adults. In comparison, average phosphorus concentration in the blood is about 0.4 g/L; about 70% of that is organic and 30% inorganic phosphates.[67]

## Nutrition
The main food sources for phosphorus are the same as those containingprotein, although proteins themselves do not contain phosphorus. For example, milk, meat, and soya typically also have phosphorus. Generally, if a diet includes sufficient protein and calcium, the amount of phosphorus is sufficient.[68]
According to theU.S. Institute of Medicine, the estimated average requirement for phosphorus for people ages 19 and up is 580 mg/day. The RDA is 700 mg/day. RDAs are higher than EARs so as to identify amounts that will cover people with higher-than-average requirements. RDA for pregnancy and lactation are also 700 mg/day. For people ages 1–18 years, the RDA increases with age from 460 to 1250 mg/day. As for safety, the IOM setstolerable upper intake levelfor phosphorus at 4000 mg/day. Collectively, these values are referred to as theDietary Reference Intake.[69]TheEuropean Food Safety Authority(EFSA) refers to the collective set of information as Dietary Reference Values, with Population Reference Intake (PRI) instead of RDA, and Average Requirement instead of EAR.[70]AI and UL are defined the same as in the United States. For people ages 15 and older, including pregnancy andlactation, the AI is set at 550 mg/day. For children ages 4–10, the AI is 440 mg/day, and for ages 11–17 it is 640 mg/day. These AIs are lower than the U.S. RDAs. In both systems, teenagers need more than adults.[71]The EFSA reviewed the same safety question and decided that there was not sufficient information to set a UL.[72]
Phosphorus deficiency may be caused bymalnutrition, by failure to absorb phosphate, and by metabolic syndromes that draw phosphate from the blood (such as inrefeeding syndromeafter malnutrition[73]) or passing too much of it into the urine. All are characterised byhypophosphatemia, which is a condition of low levels of soluble phosphate levels in the blood serum and inside the cells. Symptoms of hypophosphatemia include neurological dysfunction and disruption of muscle and blood cells due to lack ofATP. Too much phosphate can lead to diarrhoea and calcification (hardening) of organs and soft tissue, and can interfere with the body's ability to use iron, calcium, magnesium, and zinc.[74]

## Phosphorus cycle
Phosphorus is an essential plant nutrient (the most often limiting nutrient, after nitrogen),[75]and the bulk of all phosphorus production is in concentrated phosphoric acids foragriculturefertilisers, containing as much as 70% to 75%P2O5. That led to large increase in phosphate production in the second half of the 20th century.[76]Artificial phosphate fertilisation is necessary because phosphorus is essential to all living organisms; it is involved in energy transfers, strength of root and stems,photosynthesis, the expansion ofplant roots, formation of seeds and flowers, and other important factors effecting overall plant health and genetics.[75]Heavy use of phosphorus fertilisers and their runoff have resulted ineutrophication(overenrichment) ofaquatic ecosystems.[77][78]
Natural phosphorus-bearing compounds are mostly inaccessible to plants because of the low solubility and mobility in soil.[79]Most phosphorus is very stable in the soil minerals or organic matter of the soil. Even when phosphorus is added in manure or fertiliser it can become fixed in the soil. Therefore, the naturalphosphorus cycleis very slow. Some of the fixed phosphorus is released again over time, sustaining wild plant growth, however, more is needed to sustain intensive cultivation of crops.[80]Fertiliser is often in the form of superphosphate of lime, a mixture of calcium dihydrogen phosphate (Ca(H2PO4)2), and calcium sulfate dihydrate (CaSO4·2H2O) produced reacting sulfuric acid and water withcalcium phosphate.
Processing phosphate minerals with sulfuric acid for obtaining fertiliser is so important to the global economy that this is the primary industrial market forsulfuric acidand the greatest industrial use of elementalsulfur.[81]

## Mining
Means of commercial phosphorus production besides mining are few because thephosphorus cycledoes not include significant gas-phase transport.[82]The predominant source of phosphorus in modern times is phosphate rock (as opposed to the guano that preceded it).
US production of phosphate rockpeaked in 1980 at 54.4 million metric tons. The United States was the world's largest producer of phosphate rock from at least 1900, up until 2006, when US production was exceeded by that ofChina. In 2019, the US produced 10 percent of the world's phosphate rock.[83]

## Processing
Most phosphorus-bearing material is for agriculture fertilisers. In this case where the standards of purity are modest, phosphorus is obtained from phosphate rock by what is called the "wet process". The minerals are treated with sulfuric acid to givephosphoric acid. Phosphoric acid is then neutralised to give various phosphate salts, which comprise fertilisers. In the wet process, phosphorus does not undergo redox.[84]About five tons ofphosphogypsumwaste are generated per ton of phosphoric acid production. Annually, the estimated generation of phosphogypsum worldwide is 100 to 280 Mt.[85]
For the use of phosphorus in drugs, detergents, and foodstuff, the standards of purity are high, which led to the development of the thermal process. In this process, phosphate minerals are converted to white phosphorus, which can be purified by distillation. The white phosphorus is then oxidised to phosphoric acid and subsequently neutralised with a base to give phosphate salts. The thermal process is conducted in asubmerged-arc furnacewhich is energy intensive.[84]Presently, about 1,000,000short tons(910,000t) of elemental phosphorus is produced annually.Calcium phosphate(asphosphate rock), mostly mined in Florida and North Africa, can be heated to 1,200–1,500 °C with sand, which is mostlySiO2, andcoketo produceP4. TheP4product, being volatile, is readily isolated:[86]
Side products from the thermal process includeferrophosphorus, a crude form ofFe2P, resulting from iron impurities in the mineral precursors. The silicateslagis a useful construction material. The fluoride is sometimes recovered for use inwater fluoridation. More problematic is a "mud" containing significant amounts of white phosphorus. Production of white phosphorus is conducted in large facilities in part because it is energy intensive. The white phosphorus is transported in molten form. Some major accidents have occurred during transportation.[87]

## Reserves
Phosphorus comprises about 0.1% by mass of theEarth's crust.[89]However, only concentrated forms collectively referred to asphosphate rockor phosphorite are exploitable, and are not evenly distributed across the Earth.[32]Unprocessed phosphate rock has a concentration of 1.7–8.7% phosphorus by mass (4–20% phosphorus pentoxide). The world's total commercial phosphate reserves and resources are estimated in amounts of phosphate rock, which in practice includes over 300 ores of different origin, composition, and phosphate content. "Reserves" refers to the amount assumed recoverable at current market prices and "resources" refers to estimated amounts of such a grade or quality that they have reasonable prospects for economic extraction.[90][91]Mining is currently the only cost-effective method for the production of phosphorus. Hence, a shortage in rock phosphate or significant price increases might negatively affect the world'sfood security.[92]
The countries estimated to have the biggest phosphate rock commercial reserves (in billion metric tons) areMorocco(50),China(3.2),Egypt(2.8),Algeria(2.2),Syria(1.8),Brazil(1.6),Saudi Arabia(1.4),South Africa(1.4),Australia(1.1),United States(1.0), andFinland(1.0).[93][88][94]Estimates for future production vary significantly depending on modelling and assumptions on extractable volumes, but it is inescapable that future production of phosphate rock will be heavily influenced by Morocco in the foreseeable future.[95]Extensive phosphate rock deposits have also been discovered inNorwayin 2023.[96]Before these discoveries, Earth's commercial and affordable phosphorus reserves were expected to be depleted in 50–100 years.[97]
In 2023, theUnited States Geological Survey(USGS) estimated that economically extractable phosphate rock reserves worldwide are 72 billion tons, while world mining production in 2022 was 220 million tons.[88]Assuming zero growth, the reserves would thus last for around 300 years. This broadly confirms a 2010International Fertilizer Development Center(IFDC) report that global reserves would last for several hundred years.[98][99]Phosphorus reserve figures are intensely debated.[90][97][100]Gilbert suggest that there has been little external verification of the estimate.[101]A 2014 review concluded that the IFDC report "presents an inflated picture of global reserves, in particular those of Morocco, where largely hypothetical and inferred resources have simply been relabeled "reserves".[102]

## Conservation and recycling
Reducing agricultural runoff and soil erosion can slow the frequency with which farmers have to reapply phosphorus to their fields. Agricultural methods such asno-till farming,terracing,contour tilling, and the use ofwindbreakshave been shown to reduce the rate of phosphorus depletion from farmland, though do not completely remove the need for periodic fertiliser application. Strips of grassland or forest between arable land and rivers can also greatly reduce losses of phosphate and other nutrients.[103]
Sewage treatmentplants that have adedicated phosphorus removal stepproduce phosphate-richsewage sludgethat can then betreatedto extract phosphorus from it. This is done byincineratingthe sludge and recovering the resulting ash.[104]Another approach lies into the recovery of phosphorus-rich materials such asstruvitefrom waste processing plants, which is done by adding magnesium to the waste.[101]However, the technologies currently in use are not yet cost-effective, given the current price of phosphorus on the world market.[105]

## Matches
Safety matches are very difficult to ignite on any surface other than a special striker strip. The strip contains non-toxic red phosphorus and the match headpotassium chlorate, an oxygen-releasing compound. When struck, small amounts ofabrasionfrom match head and striker strip are mixed intimately to make a small quantity ofArmstrong's mixture, a very touch sensitive composition. The fine powder ignites immediately and provides the initial spark to set off the match head. Safety matches separate the two components of the ignition mixture until the match is struck. This is the key safety advantage as it prevents accidental ignition.[45][106]

## Military
Though military uses of white phosphorus are constrained by modern international law,white phosphorus munitionsare still used for military applications, such asincendiary bombs,smoke screens,smoke bombs, andtracer ammunition.

## Drug production
Elemental phosphorus can reduce elementaliodinetohydroiodic acid, which is a reagent effective for reducingephedrineorpseudoephedrinetomethamphetamine.[107]For this reason, red and white phosphorus are listed in the United States asList I precursor chemicalsby theDrug Enforcement Administration, and their handling is subject to stringent regulatory controls.[108][109][110]

## Metallurgical aspects
Phosphorus is also an important component insteelproduction, in the making ofphosphor bronze, and in many other related products.[111][112]Phosphorus is added to metallic copper during its smelting process to react with oxygen present as an impurity in copper and to produce phosphorus-containing copper (CuOFP) alloys with a higherhydrogen embrittlementresistance than normal copper.[113]Phosphate conversion coatingis a chemical treatment applied to steel parts to improve their corrosion resistance.

## Semiconductors
Phosphorus is adopantinN-type semiconductorsused in high-power electronics andsemiconductor detectors.[114]In this context, phosphorus is not present at the start of the process, but rather created directly out of silicon during the manufacture of the devices. This is done by neutrontransmutationdoping, a method based on the conversion of the30Siinto31Pbyneutron captureandbeta decayas follows:30Si(n,γ)31Si→31P+β−(T1/2=2.62h){\displaystyle ^{30}\mathrm {Si} \,(n,\gamma )\,^{31}\mathrm {Si} \rightarrow \,^{31}\mathrm {P} +\beta ^{-}\;(T_{1/2}=2.62\mathrm {h} )}
In practice, the silicon is typically placed near or inside anuclear reactorgenerating neutrons. As neutrons pass through the silicon, phosphorus atoms are produced by transmutation. This doping method is far less common than diffusion or ion implantation, but it has the advantage of creating an extremely uniform dopant distribution.[115][116]

## External contact
Elemental phosphorus poses by far the greatest danger in its white form, red phosphorus being relatively nontoxic.[118]In the past, external exposure to white phosphorus was treated by washing the affected area with 2%copper(II) sulfatesolution to form harmless compounds that are then washed away. According to 2009United States Navyguidelines:[119]
Cupric (copper) sulfate has been used by U.S. personnel in the past and is still being used by some nations. However, copper sulfate is toxic and its use will be discontinued. Copper sulfate may produce kidney and cerebral toxicity as well asintravascular hemolysis.
Instead, the manual suggests:
[...] a bicarbonate solution to neutralise phosphoric acid, which will then allow removal of visible white phosphorus. Particles often can be located by their emission of smoke when air strikes them, or by their phosphorescence in the dark. In dark surroundings, fragments are seen as luminescent spots. Promptlydebridethe burn if the patient's condition will permit removal of bits of WP (white phosphorus) that might be absorbed later and possibly produce systemic poisoning. DO NOT apply oily-basedointmentsuntil it is certain that all WP has been removed. Following complete removal of the particles, treat the lesions as thermal burns.

## Ingestion
Waxy yellow or white phosphorus is used as arodenticideas well as in fireworks, fertilizer, and ammunition. Children may  ingest phosphorus, mistaking it for toothpaste or when it is applied to bread to kill rodents. Lethal dosage is around 1 mg/kg. Symptoms occur in three stages: a day of vomiting, one to three days of no symptoms, and finally the onset of symptoms ofacute liver failureandrenal failure. There is no reliable diagnostic test for phosphorous poisoning and no known antidote.[120]

## Passive exposure
Chronic poisoning can lead tonecrosis of the jaw. In the United States, exposure to 0.1 mg/m3of white phosphorus over an 8-hour workday is set as thepermissible exposure limitby theOccupational Safety and Health Administrationand as therecommended exposure limitby theNational Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. From 5 mg/m3, it is consideredimmediately dangerous to life or health.[121]