## Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis(/ˌfoʊtəˈsɪnθəsɪs/FOH-tə-SINTH-ə-sis)[1]is asystemofbiological processesby whichphotopigment-bearingautotrophicorganisms, such as mostplants,algaeandcyanobacteria, convertlight energy— typically fromsunlight— into thechemical energynecessary to fuel theirmetabolism. The termphotosynthesisusually refers tooxygenic photosynthesis, a process that releasesoxygenas abyproductofwater splitting. Photosynthetic organisms store the converted chemical energy within thebondsof intracellularorganic compounds(complexcompoundscontainingcarbon), typicallycarbohydrateslikesugars(mainlyglucose,fructoseandsucrose),starches,phytoglycogenandcellulose. When needing to use this stored energy, an organism's cells then metabolize the organic compounds throughcellular respiration. Photosynthesis plays a critical role in producing and maintaining theoxygen contentof theEarth's atmosphere, and it supplies most of thebiological energynecessary forcomplex lifeonEarth.[2]
Some organisms also performanoxygenic photosynthesis, which does not produce oxygen. Somebacteria(e.g.purple bacteria) usebacteriochlorophyllto splithydrogen sulfideas areductantinstead ofwater, releasingsulfurinstead of oxygen, which was a dominant form of photosynthesis in theeuxinicCanfield oceansduring theBoring Billion.[3][4]Archaeasuch asHalobacteriumalso perform a type of non-carbon-fixinganoxygenic photosynthesis, where the simpler photopigmentretinaland itsmicrobial rhodopsinderivativesare used to absorb green light and produce a proton (hydron)gradientacross thecell membrane, and the subsequention movementpowerstransmembraneproton pumpsto directly synthesizeadenosine triphosphate(ATP), the "energy currency" of cells. Such archaeal photosynthesis might have been the earliest form of photosynthesis that evolved on Earth, as far back as thePaleoarchean, preceding that ofcyanobacteria(seePurple Earth hypothesis).[5]
While the details may differ betweenspecies, the process always begins when light energy is absorbed by thereaction centers, proteins that containphotosynthetic pigmentsorchromophores. In plants, these pigments arechlorophylls(aporphyrinderivative that absorbs the red and bluespectraof light, thus reflecting green) held insidechloroplasts, abundant inleafcells. In cyanobacteria, they are embedded in theplasma membrane. In these light-dependent reactions, some energy is used to stripelectronsfrom suitable substances, such as water, producing oxygen gas. Thehydrogenfreed by the splitting of water is used in the creation of two important molecules that participate in energetic processes: reducednicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate(NADPH) and ATP.
In plants,algae, andcyanobacteria, sugars are synthesized by a subsequent sequence oflight-independentreactions called theCalvin cycle. In this process, atmospheric carbon dioxide is incorporated into already existing organic compounds, such asribulose bisphosphate(RuBP).[6]Using the ATP and NADPH produced by the light-dependent reactions, the resulting compounds are thenreducedand removed to form further carbohydrates, such asglucose. In other bacteria, different mechanisms like thereverse Krebs cycleare used to achieve the same end.
The first photosynthetic organisms probablyevolvedearly in theevolutionary history of lifeusingreducing agentssuch as hydrogen or hydrogen sulfide, rather than water, as sources of electrons.[7]Cyanobacteria appeared later; theexcess oxygenthey produced contributed directly to theoxygenation of the Earth,[8]which rendered the evolution of complex life possible. The average rate of energy captured by global photosynthesis is approximately 130terawatts,[9][10][11]which is about eight times the totalpower consumption of human civilization.[12]Photosynthetic organisms also convert around 100–115 billiontons(91–104 Pgpetagrams, or billions of metric tons), of carbon intobiomassper year.[13][14]Photosynthesis was discovered in 1779 byJan Ingenhouszwho showed that plants need light, not just soil and water.

## Overview
Most photosynthetic organisms arephotoautotrophs, which means that they are able tosynthesizefood directly fromcarbon dioxideandwaterusingenergyfrom light. However, not all organisms use carbon dioxide as a source of carbon atoms to carry out photosynthesis;photoheterotrophsuse organic compounds, rather than carbon dioxide, as a source of carbon.[2]
Inplants,algae, andcyanobacteria, photosynthesis releases oxygen. Thisoxygenic photosynthesisis by far the most common type of photosynthesis used by living organisms. Some shade-loving plants (sciophytes) produce such low levels of oxygen during photosynthesis that they use all of it themselves instead of releasing it to the atmosphere.[15]
Although there are some differences between oxygenic photosynthesis in plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, the overall process is quite similar in these organisms. There are also many varieties ofanoxygenic photosynthesis, used mostly by bacteria, which consume carbon dioxide but do not release oxygen or which produce elemental sulfur instead of molecular oxygen.[16][17]
Carbon dioxide is converted into sugars in a process calledcarbon fixation; photosynthesis captures energy from sunlight to convert carbon dioxide intocarbohydrates. Carbon fixation is anendothermicredoxreaction. In general outline, photosynthesis is the opposite ofcellular respiration: while photosynthesis is a process of reduction of carbon dioxide to carbohydrates, cellular respiration is the oxidation of carbohydrates or othernutrientsto carbon dioxide. Nutrients used in cellular respiration include carbohydrates, amino acids and fatty acids. These nutrients are oxidized to produce carbon dioxide and water, and to release chemical energy to drive the organism'smetabolism.
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are distinct processes, as they take place through different sequences of chemical reactions and in differentcellular compartments(cellular respiration inmitochondria).[18][19]
The generalequationfor photosynthesis as first proposed byCornelis van Nielis:[20]
Since water is used as the electron donor in oxygenic photosynthesis, the equation for this process is:
This equation emphasizes that water is both a reactant in thelight-dependent reactionand a product of thelight-independent reaction, but cancelingnwater molecules from each side gives the net equation:
Other processes substitute other compounds (such asarsenite) for water in the electron-supply role; for example some microbes use sunlight to oxidizearsenitetoarsenate:[21]The equation for this reaction is:
Photosynthesis occurs in two stages. In the first stage,light-dependent reactionsorlight reactionscapture the energy of light and use it to make the hydrogen carrierNADPHand the energy-storage moleculeATP. During the second stage, thelight-independent reactionsuse these products to capture and reduce carbon dioxide.
Most organisms that use oxygenic photosynthesis usevisible lightfor the light-dependent reactions, although at least three use shortwaveinfraredor, more specifically, far-red radiation.[23]
Some organisms employ even more radical variants of photosynthesis. Somearchaeause a simpler method that employs a pigment similar to those used for vision in animals. Thebacteriorhodopsinchanges its configuration in response to sunlight, acting as a proton pump. This produces a proton gradient more directly, which is then converted to chemical energy. The process does not involve carbon dioxide fixation and does not release oxygen, and seems to have evolved separately from the more common types of photosynthesis.[24]

## Photosynthetic membranes and organelles
In photosynthetic bacteria, the proteins that gather light for photosynthesis are embedded incell membranes. In its simplest form, this involves the membrane surrounding the cell itself.[25]However, the membrane may be tightly folded into cylindrical sheets calledthylakoids,[26]or bunched up into roundvesiclescalledintracytoplasmic membranes.[27]These structures can fill most of the interior of a cell, giving the membrane a very large surface area and therefore increasing the amount of light that the bacteria can absorb.[26]
In plants and algae, photosynthesis takes place inorganellescalledchloroplasts. A typicalplant cellcontains about 10 to 100 chloroplasts. The chloroplast is enclosed by a membrane. This membrane is composed of a phospholipid inner membrane, a phospholipid outer membrane, and an intermembrane space. Enclosed by the membrane is an aqueous fluid called the stroma. Embedded within the stroma are stacks of thylakoids (grana), which are the site of photosynthesis. The thylakoids appear as flattened disks. The thylakoid itself is enclosed by the thylakoid membrane, and within the enclosed volume is a lumen or thylakoid space. Embedded in the thylakoid membrane are integral andperipheral membrane proteincomplexes of the photosynthetic system.
Plants absorb light primarily using thepigmentchlorophyll. The green part of thelight spectrumis not absorbed but is reflected, which is the reason that most plants have a green color. Besides chlorophyll, plants also use pigments such ascarotenesandxanthophylls.[28]Algae also use chlorophyll, but various other pigments are present, such asphycocyanin,carotenes, andxanthophyllsingreen algae,phycoerythrininred algae(rhodophytes) andfucoxanthininbrown algaeanddiatomsresulting in a wide variety of colors.
These pigments are embedded in plants and algae in complexes called antenna proteins. In such proteins, the pigments are arranged to work together. Such a combination of proteins is also called alight-harvesting complex.[29]
Although all cells in the green parts of a plant have chloroplasts, the majority of those are found in specially adapted structures calledleaves. Certain species adapted to conditions of strong sunlight andaridity, such as manyEuphorbiaandcactusspecies, have their main photosynthetic organs in their stems. The cells in the interior tissues of a leaf, called themesophyll, can contain between 450,000 and 800,000 chloroplasts for every square millimeter of leaf. The surface of the leaf is coated with a water-resistantwaxycuticlethat protects the leaf from excessiveevaporationof water and decreases the absorption ofultravioletorbluelightto minimizeheating. The transparentepidermislayer allows light to pass through to thepalisademesophyll cells where most of the photosynthesis takes place.

## Light-dependent reactions
In thelight-dependent reactions, onemoleculeof the pigmentchlorophyllabsorbs onephotonand loses oneelectron. This electron is taken up by a modified form of chlorophyll calledpheophytin, which passes the electron to aquinonemolecule, starting the flow of electrons down anelectron transport chainthat leads to the ultimatereductionofNADPtoNADPH. In addition, this creates aproton gradient(energy gradient) across thechloroplast membrane, which is used byATP synthasein the synthesis ofATP. The chlorophyll molecule ultimately regains the electron it lost when awatermolecule is split in a process calledphotolysis, which releasesoxygen.
The overall equation for the light-dependent reactions under the conditions of non-cyclic electron flow in green plants is:[30]
Not allwavelengthsoflightcan support photosynthesis. The photosyntheticaction spectrumdepends on the type ofaccessory pigmentspresent. For example, ingreen plants, the action spectrum resembles theabsorption spectrumforchlorophyllsandcarotenoidswith absorption peaks in violet-blue and red light. Inred algae, the action spectrum is blue-green light, which allows thesealgaeto use the blue end of the spectrum to grow in the deeper waters that filter out the longer wavelengths (red light) used by above-ground green plants. The non-absorbed part of thelight spectrumis what givesphotosynthetic organismstheircolor(e.g., green plants, red algae,purple bacteria) and is the least effective for photosynthesis in the respectiveorganisms.

## Z scheme
Inplants,light-dependent reactionsoccur in thethylakoid membranesof thechloroplastswhere they drive the synthesis ofATPandNADPH. The light-dependent reactions are of two forms:cyclic and non-cyclic.
In the non-cyclic reaction, the photons are captured in the light-harvestingantenna complexesofphotosystem IIbychlorophylland otheraccessory pigments(see diagram "Z-scheme"). The absorption of a photon by the antenna complex loosens an electron by a process calledphotoinduced charge separation. The antenna system is at the core of thechlorophyllmolecule of the photosystem II reaction center. That loosened electron is taken up by the primaryelectron-acceptormolecule,pheophytin. As the electrons are shuttled through anelectron transport chain(the so-calledZ-schemeshown in the diagram), achemiosmotic potentialis generated by pumpingproton cations(H+) across themembraneand into thethylakoid space. An ATP synthaseenzymeuses thatchemiosmotic potentialto make ATP duringphotophosphorylation, whereasNADPHis a product of the terminalredoxreaction in theZ-scheme. The electron enters a chlorophyllmoleculeinPhotosystem I. There it is further excited by thelightabsorbed by thatphotosystem. The electron is then passed along a chain ofelectron acceptorsto which it transfers some of itsenergy. The energy delivered to the electron acceptors is used to movehydrogen ionsacross the thylakoid membrane into thelumen. The electron is eventually used toreducethe coenzymeNADPwith anH+to NADPH (which has functions in the light-independent reaction); at that point, the path of that electron ends.
The cyclic reaction is similar to that of the non-cyclic but differs in that it generates only ATP, and no reduced NADP (NADPH) is created. The cyclic reaction takes place only at photosystem I. Once the electron is displaced from the photosystem, the electron is passed down the electron acceptor molecules and returns to photosystem I, from where it was emitted, hence the namecyclic reaction.

## Water photolysis
Linear electron transportthrough a photosystem will leave thereaction centerof that photosystemoxidized. Elevating another electron will first require re-reduction of the reaction center. The excited electrons lost from the reaction center (P700) ofphotosystem Iare replaced by transfer fromplastocyanin, whose electrons come from electron transport throughphotosystem II. Photosystem II, as the first step of theZ-scheme, requires an external source of electrons to reduce its oxidizedchlorophyllareaction center. The source of electrons for photosynthesis in green plants andcyanobacteriais water. Two water molecules are oxidized by the energy of four successive charge-separation reactions of photosystem II to yield a molecule ofdiatomicoxygen and fourhydrogenions. The electrons yielded are transferred to a redox-activetyrosineresidue that is oxidized by the energy ofP680+. This resets the ability of P680 to absorb another photon and release anotherphoto-dissociatedelectron. The oxidation of water iscatalyzedin photosystem II by a redox-active structure that contains fourmanganeseions and acalcium ion; thisoxygen-evolving complexbinds twowater moleculesand contains the four oxidizing equivalents that are used to drive the water-oxidizing reaction (Kok's S-state diagrams). The hydrogen ions are released in thethylakoid lumenand therefore contribute to the transmembrane chemiosmotic potential that leads toATP synthesis. Oxygen is awaste productof light-dependent reactions, but the majority of organisms onEarthuse oxygen and its energy forcellular respiration, includingphotosynthetic organisms.[31][32]

## Calvin cycle
In thelight-independent(or "dark") reactions, the enzymeRuBisCOcapturesCO2from theatmosphereand, in aprocesscalled theCalvin cycle, uses the newly formedNADPHand releasesthree-carbon sugars, which are latercombinedto formsucroseandstarch. The overall equation for the light-independent reactions ingreen plantsis[30]: 128
Carbon fixationproduces thethree-carbon sugar intermediate, which is then converted into the finalcarbohydrateproducts. Thesimple carbon sugarsphotosynthesis produces are then used to form otherorganic compounds, such as the building materialcellulose, theprecursorsforlipidandamino acidbiosynthesis, or as a fuel incellular respiration. The latter occurs not only inplantsbut also inanimalswhen thecarbonandenergyfrom plants is passed through afood chain.
Thefixationorreductionofcarbon dioxideis a process in which carbon dioxide combines with afive-carbon sugar,ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate, toyieldtwomoleculesof a three-carbon compound,glycerate 3-phosphate, also known as 3-phosphoglycerate. Glycerate 3-phosphate, in the presence ofATPandNADPHproduced during the light-dependent stages, is reduced toglyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. Thisproductis also referred to as 3-phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL) or, more generically, astriosephosphate. Most (five out of six molecules) of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate produced are used to regenerate ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate so the process can continue. The triose phosphates not thus "recycled" often condense to formhexosephosphates, which ultimately yieldsucrose,starch, andcellulose, as well asglucoseandfructose. Thesugarsproduced during carbonmetabolismyieldcarbon skeletonsthat can be used for othermetabolic reactionslike the production ofamino acidsandlipids.

## On land
Inhot and dry conditions, plants close theirstomatato prevent water loss. Under these conditions, CO2will decrease and oxygengas, produced by thelight reactionsof photosynthesis, will increase, causing an increase ofphotorespirationby theoxygenaseactivity ofribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase(RuBisCO) and decrease in carbon fixation. Some plants haveevolvedmechanisms to increase the CO2concentration in the leaves under these conditions.[33]
Plants that use theC4carbon fixationprocess chemically fix carbon dioxide in thecellsof themesophyllby adding it to the three-carbon moleculephosphoenolpyruvate(PEP), a reactioncatalyzedby anenzymecalledPEP carboxylase, creating the four-carbon organic acidoxaloacetic acid. Oxaloacetic acid ormalatesynthesized by this process is thentranslocatedto specializedbundle sheathcells where the enzymeRuBisCOand other Calvin cycle enzymes are located, and where CO2released bydecarboxylationof the four-carbon acids is then fixed by RuBisCO activity to the three-carbon3-phosphoglyceric acids. The physical separation of RuBisCO from the oxygen-generating light reactions reduces photorespiration and increases CO2fixation and, thus, thephotosynthetic capacityof theleaf.[34]C4plantscan produce more sugar thanC3plantsin conditions of high light andtemperature. Many importantcrop plantsare C4plants, includingmaize,sorghum,sugarcane, andmillet. Plants that do not use PEP-carboxylase in carbon fixation are called C3plants because the primarycarboxylation reaction, catalyzed by RuBisCO, produces the three-carbon 3-phosphoglyceric acids directly in theCalvin-Benson cycle. Over 90% of plants use C3carbon fixation, compared to 3% that use C4carbon fixation;[35]however, the evolution of C4in over sixty plant lineages makes it a striking example ofconvergent evolution.[33]C2photosynthesis, which involves carbon-concentration by selective breakdown of photorespiratory glycine, is both an evolutionary precursor to C4and a usefulcarbon-concentrating mechanismin its own right.[36]
Xerophytes, such ascactiand mostsucculents, also use PEP carboxylase to capture carbon dioxide in a process calledCrassulacean acid metabolism(CAM). In contrast to C4metabolism, whichspatiallyseparates the CO2fixation to PEP from the Calvin cycle, CAMtemporallyseparates these two processes. CAM plants have a differentleaf anatomyfrom C3plants, and fix the CO2at night, when their stomata are open. CAM plants store the CO2mostly in the form ofmalic acidvia carboxylation ofphosphoenolpyruvatetooxaloacetate, which is then reduced to malate. Decarboxylation of malate during the day releases CO2inside the leaves, thus allowing carbon fixation to 3-phosphoglycerate by RuBisCO. CAM is used by 16,000speciesof plants.[37]
Calcium-oxalate-accumulating plants, such asAmaranthus hybridusandColobanthus quitensis,show a variation of photosynthesis where calcium oxalatecrystalsfunction as dynamiccarbon pools, supplying carbon dioxide (CO2) to photosynthetic cells when stomata are partially or totally closed. This process was namedalarm photosynthesis. Understressconditions (e.g.,water deficit),oxalatereleased from calcium oxalate crystals is converted to CO2by anoxalate oxidaseenzyme, and the produced CO2can support theCalvin cyclereactions. Reactivehydrogen peroxide(H2O2), thebyproductof oxalate oxidase reaction, can beneutralizedbycatalase. Alarm photosynthesis represents a photosynthetic variant to be added to the well-known C4 and CAM pathways. However, alarm photosynthesis, in contrast to these pathways, operates as a biochemical pump that collects carbon from the organ interior (or from thesoil) and not from the atmosphere.[38][39]

## In water
Cyanobacteriapossesscarboxysomes, which increase the concentration of CO2around RuBisCO to increase the rate of photosynthesis. An enzyme,carbonic anhydrase, located within the carboxysome, releases CO2from dissolvedhydrocarbonate ions(HCO−3). Before the CO2can diffuse out, RuBisCO concentrated within the carboxysome quickly sponges it up. HCO−3ions are made from CO2outside the cell by another carbonic anhydrase and are actively pumped into the cell by a membrane protein. They cannot cross the membrane as they are charged, and within the cytosol they turn back into CO2very slowly without the help of carbonic anhydrase. This causes the HCO−3ions to accumulate within the cell from where they diffuse into the carboxysomes.[40]Pyrenoidsinalgaeandhornwortsalso act to concentrate CO2around RuBisCO.[41][42]

## Order and kinetics
The overallprocessof photosynthesis takes place in four stages:[14]

## Efficiency
Plantsusuallyconvert light into chemical energywith aphotosynthetic efficiencyof 3–6%.[43][44]Absorbed light that is unconverted isdissipatedprimarily asheat, with a smallfraction(1–2%) reemitted aschlorophyll fluorescenceat longer (redder)wavelengths. This fact allowsmeasurementof thelight reactionof photosynthesis by using chlorophyllfluorometers.[45]
Actual plants' photosynthetic efficiency varies with thefrequency of the lightbeing converted,light intensity,temperature, and proportion ofcarbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and can vary from 0.1% to 8%.[46]By comparison,solar panelsconvert light intoelectric energyat an efficiency of approximately 6–20% formass-producedpanels, and above 40% inlaboratorydevices.Scientistsare studying photosynthesis in hopes of developing plants with increasedyield.[44]
The efficiency of both light and dark reactions can be measured, but the relationship between the two can be complex. For example, thelight reactioncreatesATPandNADPHenergymolecules, whichC3plantscan use forcarbon fixationorphotorespiration.[47]Electronsmay also flow to other electron sinks.[48][49][50]For this reason, it is not uncommon forauthorsto differentiate between work done undernon-photorespiratory conditions and under photorespiratory conditions.[51][52][53]
Chlorophyll fluorescenceofphotosystem IIcan measure the light reaction, andinfrared gas analyzerscan measure thedark reaction.[54]An integrated chlorophyllfluorometerandgas exchange systemcan investigate both light and dark reactions when researchers use the two separatesystemstogether.[55]Infrared gas analyzers and somemoisture sensorsare sensitive enough to measure thephotosynthetic assimilationofCO2and ofΔH2O usingreliable methods. CO2is commonly measured inμmols/(m2/s),parts permillion, or volume per million; andH2Ois commonly measured inmmols/(m2/s) or inmbars. By measuringCO2assimilation, ΔH2O, leaf temperature,barometric pressure, leaf area, andphotosynthetically active radiation(PAR), it becomes possible to estimate, "A" or carbon assimilation, "E" ortranspiration, "gs" orstomatal conductance, and "Ci" or intracellular CO2.[56]However, it is more common to use chlorophyll fluorescence forplant stress measurement, where appropriate, because the most commonly used parametersFV/FMandY(II) or F/FM'can be measured in a few seconds, allowing the investigation of larger plant populations.[53]
Gas exchange systemsthat offer control of CO2levels, above and belowambient, allow the common practice of measurement of A/Ci curves, at different CO2levels, to characterize a plant's photosynthetic response.[56]
Integrated chlorophyll fluorometer – gas exchange systems allow a moreprecisemeasure of photosynthetic response and mechanisms.[54][55]While standard gas exchange photosynthesis systems can measure Ci, or substomatal CO2levels, the addition of integrated chlorophyll fluorescence measurements allows a more precise measurement of CC,the estimation of CO2concentration at the site ofcarboxylationin the chloroplast, to replace Ci.[55][54]CO2concentration in the chloroplast becomes possible to estimate with the measurement of mesophyll conductance or gmusing an integrated system.[54][55][57]
Photosynthesis measurement systems are not designed to directly measure the amount of light the leaf absorbs, but analysis ofchlorophyll fluorescence,P700- and P515-absorbance, andgas exchangemeasurements reveal detailed information about, e.g., thephotosystems,quantum efficiencyand the CO2assimilation rates. With some instruments, even wavelength dependency of the photosynthetic efficiency can beanalyzed.[58]
Aphenomenonknown asquantum walkincreases the efficiency of the energy transport of light significantly. In the photosynthetic cell of analga,bacterium, or plant, there are light-sensitive molecules calledchromophoresarranged in an antenna-shaped structure called a photocomplex. When aphotonis absorbed by a chromophore, it is converted into aquasiparticlereferred to as anexciton, which jumps from chromophore to chromophore towards the reaction center of the photocomplex, a collection of molecules that traps its energy in a chemical form accessible to the cell's metabolism. The exciton's wave properties enable it to cover a wider area and try out several possible paths simultaneously, allowing it to instantaneously "choose" the most efficient route, where it will have the highest probability of arriving at its destination in the minimum possible time.
Because that quantum walking takes place at temperatures far higher than quantum phenomena usually occur, it is only possible over very short distances. Obstacles in the form of destructive interference cause the particle to lose its wave properties for an instant before it regains them once again after it is freed from its locked position through a classic "hop". The movement of the electron towards the photo center is therefore covered in a series of conventional hops and quantum walks.[59][60][61]

## Evolution
Fossilsof what are thought to befilamentousphotosyntheticorganismshave been dated at 3.4 billion years old.[62][63]More recentstudiesalso suggest that photosynthesis may have begun about 3.4 billion years ago,[64][65]though the first directevidenceof photosynthesis comes fromthylakoid membranespreserved in 1.75-billion-year-oldcherts.[66]
Oxygenic photosynthesisis the main source ofoxygenin theEarth's atmosphere, and its earliest appearance is sometimes referred to as theoxygen catastrophe.Geologicalevidence suggests that oxygenic photosynthesis, such as that incyanobacteria, became important during thePaleoproterozoicera around two billion years ago. Modern photosynthesis inplantsand most photosyntheticprokaryotesis oxygenic, usingwateras anelectron donor, which isoxidizedto molecular oxygen in thephotosynthetic reaction center.

## Symbiosis and the origin of chloroplasts
Several groups ofanimalshave formedsymbioticrelationships with photosyntheticalgae. These are most common incorals,sponges, andsea anemones.Scientistspresume that this is due to the particularly simplebody plansand largesurface areasof these animals compared to theirvolumes.[67]In addition, a few marinemollusks, such asElysia viridisandElysia chlorotica,also maintain a symbiotic relationship withchloroplaststhey capture from the algae intheir dietand then store in their bodies (seeKleptoplasty). This allows the mollusks to survive solely by photosynthesis for several months at a time.[68][69]Some of thegenesfrom the plantcell nucleushave even been transferred to theslugs, so that the chloroplasts can be supplied withproteinsthey need to survive.[70]
An even closer form of symbiosis may explain the origin of chloroplasts. Chloroplasts have many similarities with photosyntheticbacteria, including a circularchromosome, prokaryotic-typeribosome, and similarproteins in the photosynthetic reaction center.[71][72]Theendosymbiotic theorysuggests that photosynthetic bacteria were acquired (byendocytosis) by earlyeukaryoticcells to form the first plant cells. Therefore, chloroplasts may be photosynthetic bacteria that adapted to life inside plant cells. Likemitochondria, chloroplasts possess their ownDNA, separate from thenuclear DNAof their plant host cells and the genes in this chloroplast DNA resemble those found incyanobacteria.[73]DNA in chloroplasts codes forredoxproteins such as those found in the photosynthetic reaction centers. TheCoRR Hypothesisproposes that this co-location of genes with their gene products is required for redox regulation ofgene expression, and accounts for the persistence of DNA in bioenergeticorganelles.[74]

## Photosynthetic eukaryotic lineages
Symbiotic andkleptoplasticorganisms excluded:
Except for the euglenids, which are found within theExcavata, all of these belong to theDiaphoretickes. Archaeplastida and the photosynthetic Paulinella got their plastids, which are surrounded by two membranes, through primaryendosymbiosisin two separate events, by engulfing a cyanobacterium. The plastids in all the other groups have either a red or green algal origin, and are referred to as the "red lineages" and the "green lineages". The only known exception is the ciliatePseudoblepharisma tenue, which in addition to its plastids that originated from green algae also has apurple sulfur bacteriumas symbiont. In dinoflagellates and euglenids the plastids are surrounded by three membranes, and in the remaining lines by four. Anucleomorph, remnants of the original algal nucleus located between the inner and outer membranes of the plastid, is present in the cryptophytes (from a red alga) and chlorarachniophytes (from a green alga).[75]Some dinoflagellates that lost their photosynthetic ability later regained it again through new endosymbiotic events with different algae.
While able to perform photosynthesis, many of these eukaryotic groups aremixotrophsand practiceheterotrophyto various degrees.

## Photosynthetic prokaryotic lineages
Early photosynthetic systems, such as those ingreenandpurple sulfurandgreenandpurple nonsulfur bacteria, are thought to have beenanoxygenic, and used various other molecules than water aselectron donors. Green and purple sulfur bacteria are thought to have usedhydrogenandsulfuras electron donors. Green nonsulfur bacteria used variousaminoand otherorganic acidsas electron donors. Purple nonsulfur bacteria used a variety of nonspecific organic molecules. The use of these molecules is consistent with the geological evidence that Earth's early atmosphere was highlyreducingatthat time.[76]
With a possible exception ofHeimdallarchaeota, photosynthesis is not found inarchaea.[77]Haloarchaeaarephotoheterotrophic; they can absorb energy from the sun, but do not harvest carbon from the atmosphere and are therefore not photosynthetic.[78]Instead of chlorophyll they use rhodopsins, which convert light-energy to ion gradients but cannot mediate electron transfer reactions.[79][80]
Inbacteriaeight photosynthetic lineages are currently known:[81][82][83][84]

## Cyanobacteria and the evolution of photosynthesis
The biochemical capacity to use water as the source for electrons in photosynthesis evolved once, in acommon ancestorof extantcyanobacteria(formerly called blue-green algae). The geological record indicates that this transforming event took place early in Earth's history, at least 2450–2320 million years ago (Ma), and, it is speculated, much earlier.[85][86]Because the Earth's atmosphere contained almost no oxygen during the estimated development of photosynthesis, it is believed that the first photosynthetic cyanobacteria did not generate oxygen.[87]Available evidence from geobiological studies ofArchean(>2500 Ma)sedimentary rocksindicates that life existed 3500 Ma, but the question of when oxygenic photosynthesis evolved is still unanswered. A clear paleontological window on cyanobacterialevolutionopened about 2000 Ma, revealing an already-diverse biota of cyanobacteria. Cyanobacteria remained the principalprimary producersof oxygen throughout theProterozoic Eon(2500–543 Ma), in part because the redox structure of the oceans favored photoautotrophs capable ofnitrogen fixation.[88][89]Green algaejoined cyanobacteria as the major primary producers of oxygen oncontinental shelvesnear the end of theProterozoic, but only with theMesozoic(251–66 Ma) radiations of dinoflagellates, coccolithophorids, and diatoms did theprimary productionof oxygen in marine shelf waters take modern form. Cyanobacteria remain critical tomarine ecosystemsasprimary producers of oxygenin oceanic gyres, as agents of biological nitrogen fixation, and, in modified form, as theplastidsof marine algae.[90]

## Discovery
Although some of the steps in photosynthesis are still not completely understood, the overall photosynthetic equation has been known since the 19th century.
Jan van Helmontbegan theresearchof theprocessin the mid-17th century when he carefully measured themassof thesoilaplantwas using and the mass of the plant as it grew. After noticing that the soil mass changed very little, hehypothesizedthat the mass of thegrowingplant must come from thewater, the onlysubstancehe added to the potted plant. His hypothesis was partiallyaccurate– much of the gained mass comes fromcarbon dioxideas well as water. However, this was a signaling point to the idea that the bulk of a plant'sbiomasscomes from the inputs of photosynthesis, not the soil itself.
Joseph Priestley, achemistandminister, discovered that when he isolated avolumeof air under an invertedjarand burned acandlein it (which gave offCO2), the candle would burn out very quickly, much before it ran out ofwax. He further discovered that amousecould similarly"injure"air. He then showed that a plant could restore the air the candle and the mouse had "injured".[91]
In 1779,Jan Ingenhouszrepeated Priestley'sexperiments. He discovered that it was the influence ofsunlighton the plant that could cause it to revive a mouse in a matter of hours.[91][92]
In 1796,Jean Senebier, a Swisspastor,botanist, andnaturalist,demonstratedthatgreen plantsconsume carbon dioxide and release oxygen under the influence oflight. Soon afterward,Nicolas-Théodore de Saussureshowed that the increase in mass of the plant as it grows could not be due only to uptake of CO2but also to the incorporation of water. Thus, the basicreactionby whichorganismsuse photosynthesis to producefood(such asglucose) was outlined.[93]

## Refinements
Cornelis Van Nielmade key discoveries explaining thechemistryof photosynthesis. By studyingpurple sulfur bacteriaandgreen bacteria, he was the first to demonstrate that photosynthesis is a light-dependentredox reactionin which hydrogenreduces(donates itsatomsaselectronsandprotonsto) carbon dioxide.
Robert Emersondiscovered two light reactions by testing plant productivity using different wavelengths of light. With the red alone, the light reactions were suppressed. When blue and red were combined, the output was much more substantial. Thus, there were two photosystems, one absorbing up to 600 nm wavelengths, the other up to 700 nm. The former is known as PSII, the latter is PSI. PSI contains only chlorophyll "a", PSII contains primarily chlorophyll "a" with most of the available chlorophyll "b", among other pigments. These include phycobilins, which are the red and blue pigments of red and blue algae, respectively, and fucoxanthol for brown algae and diatoms. The process is most productive when the absorption of quanta is equal in both PSII and PSI, assuring that input energy from the antenna complex is divided between the PSI and PSII systems, which in turn powers the photochemistry.[14]
Robert Hillthought that a complex of reactions consisted of an intermediate to cytochrome b6(now a plastoquinone), and that another was from cytochrome f to a step in the carbohydrate-generating mechanisms. These are linked by plastoquinone, which does require energy to reduce cytochrome f. Further experiments to prove that the oxygen developed during the photosynthesis of green plants came from water were performed by Hill in 1937 and 1939. He showed that isolatedchloroplastsgive off oxygen in the presence of unnatural reducing agents likeironoxalate,ferricyanideorbenzoquinoneafter exposure to light. In the Hill reaction:[94]
A is the electron acceptor. Therefore, in light, the electron acceptor is reduced and oxygen is evolved.Samuel RubenandMartin Kamenusedradioactive isotopesto determine that the oxygen liberated in photosynthesis came from the water.
Melvin CalvinandAndrew Benson, along withJames Bassham, elucidated the path of carbon assimilation (the photosynthetic carbon reduction cycle) in plants. The carbon reduction cycle is known as theCalvin cycle, but many scientists refer to it as the Calvin-Benson, Benson-Calvin, or even Calvin-Benson-Bassham (or CBB) Cycle.
Nobel Prize–winning scientistRudolph A. Marcuswas later able to discover the function and significance of the electron transport chain.
Otto Heinrich WarburgandDean Burkdiscovered the I-quantum photosynthesis reaction that splits CO2, activated by the respiration.[95]
In 1950, first experimental evidence for the existence ofphotophosphorylationin vivowas presented byOtto Kandlerusing intactChlorellacells and interpreting his findings as light-dependentATPformation.[96]In 1954,Daniel I. Arnonet al. discovered photophosphorylationin vitroin isolatedchloroplastswith the help of P32.[97][98]
Louis N. M. DuysensandJan Ameszdiscovered that chlorophyll "a" will absorb one light, oxidize cytochrome f, while chlorophyll "a" (and other pigments) will absorb another light but will reduce this same oxidized cytochrome, stating the two light reactions are in series.

## Development of the concept
In 1893, the American botanistCharles Reid Barnesproposed two terms,photosyntaxandphotosynthesis, for the biological process ofsynthesis of complex carbon compounds out of carbonic acid, in the presence of chlorophyll, under the influence of light. The termphotosynthesisis derived from theGreekphōs(φῶς, gleam) andsýnthesis(σύνθεσις, arranging together),[99][100][101]while another word that he designated wasphotosyntax, fromsýntaxis(σύνταξις, configuration). Over time, the termphotosynthesiscame into common usage. Later discovery of anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria and photophosphorylation necessitated redefinition of the term.[102]

## C3 : C4 photosynthesis research
In the late 1940s at theUniversity of California, Berkeley, the details of photosynthetic carbon metabolism were sorted out by the chemistsMelvin Calvin, Andrew Benson, James Bassham and a score of students and researchers utilizing the carbon-14 isotope and paper chromatography techniques.[103]The pathway of CO2fixation by the algaeChlorellain a fraction of a second in light resulted in a three carbon molecule called phosphoglyceric acid (PGA). For that original and ground-breaking work, aNobel Prize in Chemistrywas awarded to Melvin Calvin in 1961. In parallel, plant physiologists studied leaf gas exchanges using the new method of infrared gas analysis and a leaf chamber where the net photosynthetic rates ranged from 10 to 13 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1, with the conclusion that all terrestrial plants have the same photosynthetic capacities, that are light saturated at less than 50% of sunlight.[104][105]
Later in 1958–1963 atCornell University, field grownmaizewas reported to have much greater leaf photosynthetic rates of 40 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1and not be saturated at near full sunlight.[106][107]This higher rate in maize was almost double of those observed in other species such as wheat and soybean, indicating that large differences in photosynthesis exist among higher plants. At the University of Arizona, detailed gas exchange research on more than 15 species ofmonocotsanddicotsuncovered for the first time that differences in leaf anatomy are crucial factors in differentiating photosynthetic capacities among species.[108][109]In tropical grasses, including maize, sorghum, sugarcane, Bermuda grass and in the dicot amaranthus, leaf photosynthetic rates were around 38−40 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1, and the leaves have two types of green cells, i.e. outer layer of mesophyll cells surrounding a tightly packed cholorophyllous vascular bundle sheath cells. This type of anatomy was termed Kranz anatomy in the 19th century by the botanistGottlieb Haberlandtwhile studying leaf anatomy of sugarcane.[110]Plant species with the greatest photosynthetic rates and Kranz anatomy showed no apparent photorespiration, very low CO2compensation point, high optimum temperature, high stomatal resistances and lower mesophyll resistances for gas diffusion and rates never saturated at full sun light.[111]The research at Arizona was designated a Citation Classic in 1986.[109]These species were later termed C4 plants as the first stable compound of CO2fixation in light has four carbons as malate and aspartate.[112][113][114]Other species that lack Kranz anatomy were termed C3 type such as cotton and sunflower, as the first stable carbon compound is the three-carbon PGA. At 1000 ppm CO2in measuring air, both the C3 and C4 plants had similar leaf photosynthetic rates around 60 μmol CO2·m−2·s−1indicating the suppression of photorespiration in C3 plants.[108][109]

## Factors
There are four main factors influencing photosynthesis and several corollary factors. The four main are:[115]
Total photosynthesis is limited by a range of environmental factors. These include the amount of light available, the amount ofleafarea a plant has to capture light (shading by other plants is a major limitation of photosynthesis), the rate at which carbon dioxide can be supplied to thechloroplaststo support photosynthesis, the availability of water, and the availability of suitable temperatures for carrying out photosynthesis.[116]

## Light intensity (irradiance), wavelength and temperature
The process of photosynthesis provides the main input of free energy into the biosphere, and is one of four main ways in which radiation is important for plant life.[117]
The radiation climate within plant communities is extremely variable, in both time and space.
In the early 20th century,Frederick BlackmanandGabrielle Matthaeiinvestigated the effects of light intensity (irradiance) and temperature on the rate of carbon assimilation.
These two experiments illustrate several important points: First, it is known that, in general,photochemicalreactions are not affected bytemperature. However, these experiments clearly show that temperature affects the rate of carbon assimilation, so there must be two sets of reactions in the full process of carbon assimilation. These are the light-dependent 'photochemical' temperature-independent stage, and the light-independent, temperature-dependent stage. Second, Blackman's experiments illustrate the concept oflimiting factors. Another limiting factor is the wavelength of light. Cyanobacteria, which reside several meters underwater, cannot receive the correct wavelengths required to cause photoinduced charge separation in conventional photosynthetic pigments. To combat this problem, Cyanobacteria have a light-harvesting complex calledPhycobilisome.[118]This complex is made up of a series of proteins with different pigments which surround the reaction center.

## Carbon dioxide levels and photorespiration
As carbon dioxide concentrations rise, the rate at which sugars are made by the light-independent reactions increases until limited by other factors.RuBisCO, the enzyme that captures carbon dioxide in the light-independent reactions, has a binding affinity for both carbon dioxide and oxygen. When the concentration of carbon dioxide is high, RuBisCO will fix carbon dioxide. However, if the carbon dioxide concentration is low, RuBisCO will bind oxygen instead of carbon dioxide. This process, calledphotorespiration, uses energy, but does not produce sugars.
RuBisCO oxygenase activity is disadvantageous to plants for several reasons:
The salvaging pathway for the products of RuBisCO oxygenase activity is more commonly known as photorespiration, since it is characterized by light-dependent oxygen consumption and the release of carbon dioxide.