## Pixar
Pixar[a](/ˈpɪksɑːr/),doing business asPixar Animation Studios, is an Americananimation studiobased inEmeryville, California, known for its commercially successfulcomputer-animatedfeature films. Pixar is asubsidiaryofWalt Disney Studios, a division of theDisney Entertainmentsegment ofthe Walt Disney Company.
The studio started in 1979 as part of theLucasfilmcomputer division. It was known as theGraphics Groupbefore itsspin-off as a corporationin 1986, with funding fromAppleco-founderSteve Jobs, who became itsmajority shareholder.[2]The studio'smascotisLuxo Jr., adesk lampfrom the studio's 1986short film of the same name. Disney announced its acquisition of Pixar in January 2006, and completed it in May 2006.[6][7][8]Pixar is best known for itsfeature films, technologically powered by itsRenderMan software. RenderMan began as Pixar's implementation of the industry-standardRenderMan Interface Specification(RISpec)image-renderingAPI, which came out in 1988; support for RISpec was dropped in 2016. RenderMan became fullypath-tracedandphysically based(PBR).
In addition to producingshort films, Pixar has produced30 feature films, with its first film beingToy Story(1995), which is also the first fully computer-animated feature film, and its most recent film wasHoppers(2026). As of July 2023[update], its feature films have earned over $17 billion at the worldwidebox officewith an average gross of $589 million per film.[9]Toy Story 3(2010),Finding Dory(2016),Incredibles 2(2018),Toy Story 4(2019) andInside Out 2(2024) all grossed over $1 billion and are among the50 highest-grossing films of all time. Moreover, 13 of Pixar's films are in the50 highest-grossing animated films of all time. As of August 2025[update],Inside Out 2was the second highest-grossing animated film of all time.[10]
Pixar has earned 23Academy Awards, 10Golden Globe Awards, and 11Grammy Awards, along with numerousother awards and acknowledgments. Since its inauguration in 2001, eleven Pixar films have won theAcademy Award for Best Animated Feature, includingFinding Nemo(2003),The Incredibles(2004),Ratatouille(2007),WALL-E(2008),Up(2009),Toy Story 3andToy Story 4,Brave(2012),Inside Out(2015),Coco(2017), andSoul(2020).Toy Story 3andUpwere also nominated for theAcademy Award for Best Picture.
In February 2009, Pixar executivesJohn Lasseter,Brad Bird,Pete Docter,Andrew Stanton, andLee Unkrichwere presented with theGolden Lion for Lifetime Achievementby theVenice Film Festival. The physical award was ceremonially handed to Lucasfilm's founder,George Lucas.

## Early history
Pixar got its start in 1974, whenNew York Institute of Technology's founder,Alexander Schure, who was also the owner of a traditional animation studio, established theComputer Graphics Lab(CGL) and recruitedcomputer scientistswho shared his ambitions about creating the world's first computer-animated film.[11]Edwin Catmulland Malcolm Blanchard were the first to be hired and were soon joined byAlvy Ray SmithandDavid DiFrancescosome months later, who were the four original members of the Computer Graphics Lab, located in a converted two-story garage acquired from the formerVanderbilt-Whitneyestate.[12][13]Schure invested significant funds into the computer graphics lab, approximately $15 million, providing the resources the group needed but contributing to NYIT's financial difficulties.[14]Eventually, the group realized they needed to work in a realfilm studioto reach their goal.Francis Ford Coppolathen invited Smith to his house for a three-day media conference, where Coppola andGeorge Lucasshared their visions for the future of digital moviemaking.[15]
When Lucas approached the group and offered them jobs at his studio, six employees moved toLucasfilm. During the following months, they gradually resigned from CGL, found temporary jobs for about a year to avoid making Schure suspicious, and joined the Graphics Group at Lucasfilm.[16][17]The Graphics Group, which was one-third of the Computer Division of Lucasfilm, opened in 1979 with the hiring of Catmull from NYIT,[18]where he was in charge of the Computer Graphics Lab. He was then reunited with Smith, who also made the journey from NYIT to Lucasfilm, and was made the director of the Graphics Group. At NYIT, the researchers pioneered many of the CG foundation techniques — in particular, the invention of thealpha channelby Catmull and Smith.[19]Over the next several years, the CGL would produce a few frames of an experimental film calledThe Works. After moving to Lucasfilm, the team worked on creating the precursor toRenderMan, called REYES (for "renders everything you ever saw"), and developed several critical technologies for CG — includingparticle effectsand various animation tools.[20]
John Lasseterwas hired to the Lucasfilm team for a week in late 1983 with the title "interface designer"; he animated the short filmThe Adventures of André & Wally B.[21]In the next few years, a designer suggested naming a new digital compositing computer the "Picture Maker". Smith suggested that the laser-based device have a catchier name, and came up with "Pixer", which after a meeting was changed to "Pixar".[22]According toMichael Rubin, the author ofDroidmaker: George Lucas and the Digital Revolution, Smith and three other employees came up with the name during a restaurant visit in 1981, but when interviewing them he got four different versions about the origin of the name.[23]
In 1982, the Pixar team began working on special-effects film sequences withIndustrial Light & Magic. After years of research, and key milestones such as the Genesis Effect inStar Trek II: The Wrath of Khanand the Stained Glass Knight inYoung Sherlock Holmes,[18]the group, which then numbered 40 individuals, was spun out as a corporation in February 1986 by Catmull and Smith. Among the 38 remaining employees were Malcolm Blanchard, David DiFrancesco,Ralph Guggenheim, and Bill Reeves, who had been part of the team since the days of NYIT.Tom Duff, also an NYIT member, would later join Pixar after its formation.[2]With Lucas's 1983 divorce, which coincided with the sudden dropoff in revenues fromStar Warslicenses following the release ofReturn of the Jedi, they knew he would most likely sell the whole Graphics Group. Worried that the employees would be lost to them if that happened, which would prevent the creation of the first computer-animated movie, they concluded that the best way to keep the team together was to turn the group into an independent company. ButMoore's Lawalso suggested that sufficient computing power for the first film was still some years away, and they needed to focus on a proper product until then. Eventually, they decided they should be a hardware company in the meantime, with theirPixar Image Computeras the core product, a system primarily sold to governmental, scientific, and medical markets.[2][14][24]They also usedSGIcomputers.[25]
In 1983,Nolan Bushnellfounded a new computer-guided animation studio called Kadabrascope as a subsidiary of hisChuck E. Cheese'sPizza Time Theatres company (PTT), which was founded in 1977. Only one major project was made out of the new studio, an animated Christmas special forNBCstarring Chuck E. Cheese and other PTT mascots; known as "Chuck E. Cheese: The Christmas That Almost Wasn't". The animation movement would be made usingtweeninginstead of traditional cel animation. After thevideo game crash of 1983, Bushnell started selling some subsidiaries of PTT to keep the business afloat.Sente Technologies(another division, was founded to have games distributed in PTT stores) was sold toBally Gamesand Kadabrascope was sold to Lucasfilm. The Kadabrascope assets were combined with the Computer Division of Lucasfilm.[26]Coincidentally, one ofSteve Jobs's first jobs was under Bushnell in 1973 as a technician at his other companyAtari, which Bushnell sold toWarner Communicationsin 1976 to focus on PTT.[27]PTT would later go bankrupt in 1984 and be acquired byShowBiz Pizza Place.[28]

## Independent company (1986–1999)
In 1986, the newly independent Pixar was headed by PresidentEdwin Catmulland Executive Vice PresidentAlvy Ray Smith. Lucas's search for investors led to an offer fromSteve Jobs, which Lucas initially found too low. He eventually accepted after determining it impossible to find other investors. At that point, Smith and Catmull had been declined by 35 venture capitalists and ten large corporations,[29]including a deal withGeneral Motorswhich fell through three days before signing the contracts.[30]Jobs, who had been edged out ofApplein 1985,[2]was now founder and CEO of the new computer companyNeXT. On February 3, 1986, he paid $5 million of his own money to George Lucas for technology rights and invested $5 million cash as capital into the company, joining the board of directors as chairman.[2][31]
In 1985 while still at Lucasfilm, they had made a deal with the Japanese publisherShogakukanto make a computer-animated movie calledMonkey, based on theMonkey King. The project continued sometime after they became a separate company in 1986, but it became clear that the technology was not sufficiently advanced. The computers were not powerful enough and the budget would be too high. As a result, they focused on the computer hardware business for years until a computer-animated feature became feasible according toMoore's law.[32][33]
At the time,Walt Disney Studiosmade the decision to develop more efficient ways of producing animation. They reached out to Graphics Group at Lucasfilm and toDigital Productions. Because of the Graphics Group's deeper understanding of animation, and Smith's experience with paint programs at NYIT, it convinced Disney they were the right choice. In May 1986 Pixar signed a contract with Disney, who eventually bought and used the Pixar Image Computer and custom software written by Pixar as part of itsComputer Animation Production System(CAPS) project, to migrate the laborious ink and paint part of the 2D animation process to a more automated method.[34]The company's first feature film to be released using this new animation method wasThe Rescuers Down Under(1990).[35][36]
In a bid to drive sales of the system and increase the company's capital, Jobs suggested releasing the product to the mainstream market. Pixar employee John Lasseter, who had long been working on not-for-profit short demonstration animations, such asLuxo Jr.(1986) to show off the device's capabilities, premiered his creations to great fanfare atSIGGRAPH, the computer graphics industry's largest convention.[37]
However, the Image Computer had inadequate sales[37]which threatened to end the company as financial losses grew. Jobs increased investment in exchange for an increased stake, reducing the proportion of management and employee ownership until eventually, his total investment of $50 million gave him control of the entire company. In 1989, Lasseter's growing animation department which was originally composed of just four people (Lasseter,Bill Reeves,Eben Ostby, andSam Leffler), was turned into a division that produced computer-animated commercials for outside companies.[1][38][39]In April 1990, Pixar sold its hardware division, including all proprietary hardware technology and imaging software, to Vicom Systems, and transferred 18 of Pixar's approximately 100 employees. In the same year Pixar moved fromSan RafaeltoRichmond, California.[40]Pixar released some of its software tools on the open market for Macintosh and Windows systems.RenderManis one of the leading 3D packages of the early 1990s, andTypestryis a special-purpose 3D text renderer that competed with RayDream.[citation needed]
During this period of time, Pixar continued its successful relationship withWalt Disney Feature Animation, a studio whose corporate parent would ultimately become its most important partner. As 1991 began, however, the layoff of 30 employees in the company's computer hardware department (including the company's president, Chuck Kolstad[41]),  reduced the total number of employees to just 42, approximately its original number.[42]On March 6, 1991, Steve Jobs bought the company from its employees and became the full owner. He contemplated folding it into NeXT, but the NeXT's co-founders refused.[30]A few months later Pixar made a historic $26 million deal with Disney to produce three computer-animated feature films, the first of which wasToy Story(1995), the product of the technological limitations that challenged CGI.[43]By then the software programmers working on RenderMan and IceMan, and Lasseter's animation department, which made television commercials (and four Luxo Jr. shorts forSesame Streetthe same year), were all that remained of Pixar.[44]
Despite the income from these projects, the company still continued to lose money, and Steve Jobs, as chairman of the board and now owner, often considered selling it. As late as 1994, Jobs contemplated selling Pixar to other companies such asHallmark Cards,Microsoftco-founderPaul Allen, andOracleCEO and co-founderLarry Ellison.[45]After learning from New York critics thatToy Storywould probably be a hit, and confirming that Disney would distribute it for the 1995 Christmas season, he decided to give Pixar another chance.[46][47]Also for the first time, he took an active leadership role in the company and made himself CEO.[48]Toy Storygrossed more than $448 million worldwide[49]and, when Pixar held itsinitial public offeringon November 29, 1995, trading as "PIXR" onNASDAQ, it exceededNetscape's as the biggest IPO of the year. In its first half-hour of trading, Pixar stock shot from $28 to $45, delaying trading because of unmatched buy orders. Shares climbed toUS$50and closed the day at $42.[50]
The company continued to make the television commercials during the production ofToy Story, which came to an end on July 9, 1996, when Pixar announced they would shut down its television commercial unit, which counted 18 employees, to focus on longer projects and interactive entertainment.[51][52]
During the 1990s and 2000s, Pixar gradually developed the "Pixar Braintrust", the studio's primary creative development process, in which all of its directors, writers, and lead storyboard artists regularly examine each other's projects and give very candid "notes", the industry term forconstructive criticism.[53]The Braintrust operates under a philosophy of a "filmmaker-driven studio", in which creatives help each other move their films forward through a process somewhat likepeer review, as opposed to the traditional Hollywood approach of an "executive-driven studio" in which directors aremicromanagedthrough "mandatory notes" from development executives outranking the producers.[54][55]According to Catmull, it evolved out of the working relationship between Lasseter,Andrew Stanton,Pete Docter,Lee Unkrich, andJoe RanftonToy Story.[53]
As a result of the success ofToy Story, Pixar built a new studio at the Emeryville campus which was designed by PWP Landscape Architecture and opened in November 2000.[citation needed]

## Collaboration with Disney (1999–2006)
Pixar and Disney had disagreements over the production ofToy Story 2. Originally intended as a direct-to-video release (and thus not part of Pixar's three-picture deal), the film was eventually upgraded to a theatrical release during production. Pixar demanded that the film then be counted toward the three-picture agreement, but Disney refused.[56]Though profitable for both, Pixar later complained that the arrangement was not equitable. Pixar was responsible for creation and production, while Disney handledmarketingand distribution. Profits and production costs were split equally, but Disney exclusively owned all story, character, and sequel rights and also collected a 10%-15% distribution fee.[57]
The two companies attempted to reach a new agreement for ten months and failed on January 26, 2001, July 26, 2002, April 22, 2003, January 16, 2004, July 22, 2004, and January 14, 2005. The proposed distribution deal meant Pixar would control production and own the resulting story, character, and sequel rights, while Disney would own the right of first refusal to distribute any sequels. Pixar also wanted to finance its own films and collect 100% profit, paying Disney the 10%-15% distribution fee.[58]In addition, as part of any distribution agreement with Disney, Pixar demanded control over films already in production under the old agreement, includingThe Incredibles(2004) andCars(2006). Disney considered these conditions unacceptable, but Pixar would not concede.[citation needed]
Disagreements between Steve Jobs and Disney chairman and CEOMichael Eisnercaused the negotiations to cease in 2004, with Disney formingCircle Seven Animationand Jobs declaring that Pixar was actively seeking partners other than Disney.[59]Despite this announcement and several talks withWarner Bros.,Sony Pictures, and20th Century Fox, Pixar did not enter negotiations with other distributors,[60]although a Warner Bros. spokesperson toldCNN, "We would love to be in business with Pixar. They are a great company."[58]After a lengthy hiatus, negotiations between the two companies resumed following the departure of Eisner from Disney in September 2005. In preparation for potential fallout between Pixar and Disney, Jobs announced in late 2004 that Pixar would no longer release movies at the Disney-dictated November time frame, but during the more lucrative early summer months. This would also allow Pixar to release DVDs for its major releases during theChristmas shopping season. An added benefit of delayingCarsfrom November 4, 2005, to June 9, 2006, was to extend the time frame remaining on the Pixar-Disney contract, to see how things would play out between the two companies.[60]
Pending the Disney acquisition of Pixar, the two companies created a distribution deal for the intended 2007 release ofRatatouille, to ensure that if the acquisition failed, this one film would be released through Disney's distribution channels. In contrast to the earlier Pixar deal,Ratatouillewas meant to remain a Pixar property and Disney would have received a distribution fee. The completion of Disney's Pixar acquisition, however, nullified this distribution arrangement.[61]

## Walt Disney Studios subsidiary (2006–present)
After extended negotiations, Disney ultimately agreed on January 24, 2006, to buy Pixar for approximately $7.4 billion in anall-stock deal.[62]Following Pixarshareholderapproval, the acquisition was completed on May 5, 2006. The transaction catapulted Jobs, who owned 49.65% of total share interest in Pixar, to Disney's largest individual shareholder with 7%, valued at $3.9 billion, and a new seat on its board of directors.[8][63]Jobs' new Disney holdings exceeded holdings belonging to Eisner, the previous top shareholder, who still held 1.7%; and Disney Director EmeritusRoy E. Disney, who held almost 1% of the corporation's shares. Pixar shareholders received 2.3 shares of Disney common stock for each share of Pixar common stock redeemed.[64]
As part of the deal, John Lasseter, by then Executive Vice President, becameChief Creative Officer(reporting directly to president and CEOBob Igerand consulting with Disney Director Roy E. Disney) of both Pixar andWalt Disney Animation Studios(including its divisionDisneytoon Studios), as well as the Principal Creative Adviser atWalt Disney Imagineering, which designs and builds the company'stheme parks.[63]Catmull retained his position as President of Pixar, while also becoming President of Walt Disney Animation Studios, reporting to Iger andDick Cook, chairman of theWalt Disney Studios. Jobs's position as Pixar's chairman and chief executive officer was abolished, and instead, he took a place on the Disney board of directors.[65]
After the deal closed in May 2006, Lasseter revealed that Iger had felt that Disney needed to buy Pixar while watching a parade at the opening ofHong Kong Disneylandin September 2005.[66]Iger noticed that of all the Disney characters in the parade, none were characters that Disney had created within the last ten years since all the newer ones had been created by Pixar.[66]Upon returning to Burbank, Iger commissioned a financial analysis that confirmed that Disney had actually lost money on animation for the past decade, then presented that information to the board of directors at his first board meeting after being promoted from COO to CEO, and the board, in turn, authorized him to explore the possibility of a deal with Pixar.[67]Lasseter and Catmull were wary when the topic of Disney buying Pixar first came up, but Jobs asked them to give Iger a chance (based on his own experience negotiating with Iger in summer 2005 for the rights toABCshows for the fifth-generationiPod Classic),[68]and in turn, Iger convinced them of the sincerity of his feeling that Disney needed to re-focus on animation.[66]
Lasseter and Catmull's oversight of both the Disney Feature Animation and Pixar studios did not mean that the two studios were merging, however. In fact, additional conditions were laid out as part of the deal to ensure that Pixar remained a separateentity, a concern that analysts had expressed about the Disney deal.[69][page needed]Some of those conditions were that PixarHRpolicies would remain intact, including the lack of employment contracts. Also, the Pixar name was guaranteed to continue, and the studio would remain in its currentEmeryville, California, location with the "Pixar" sign. Finally, branding of films made post-merger would be "Disney•Pixar" (beginning withCars).[70]
Jim Morris, producer ofWALL-E(2008), became general manager of Pixar. In this new position, Morris took charge of the day-to-day running of the studio facilities and products.[71]
After a few years, Lasseter and Catmull were able to successfully transfer the basic principles of the Pixar Braintrust to Disney Animation, although meetings of the Disney Story Trust are reportedly "more polite" than those of the Pixar Braintrust.[72]Catmull later explained that after the merger, to maintain the studios' separate identities and cultures (notwithstanding the fact of common ownership and common senior management), he and Lasseter "drew a hard line" that each studio was solely responsible for its own projects and would not be allowed to borrow personnel from or lend tasks out to the other.[73][74]The rule ensures that each studio maintains "local ownership" of projects and can be proud of its own work.[73][74]Thus for example, when Pixar had issues withRatatouilleand Disney Animation had issues withBolt(2008), "nobody bailed them out" and each studio was required "to solve the problem on its own" despite knowing that there were personnel at the other studio who theoretically could have helped.[73][74]

## Expansion and John Lasseter's exit (2010–2018)
On April 20, 2010, Pixar openedPixar Canadain the downtown area ofVancouver, British Columbia, Canada.[75]The roughly 2,000 square meters studio produced seven short films based onToy StoryandCarscharacters. In October 2013, the studio was closed down to refocus Pixar's efforts at its main headquarters.[76]
In November 2014, Morris was promoted to president of Pixar, while his counterpart at Disney Animation, general manager Andrew Millstein, was also promoted to president of that studio.[77]Both continued to report to Catmull, who retained the title of president of both Disney Animation and Pixar.[77]
On November 21, 2017, Lasseter announced that he was taking a six-month leave of absence after acknowledging what he called "missteps" in his behavior with employees in a memo to staff. According toThe Hollywood ReporterandThe Washington Post, Lasseter had a history of alleged sexual misconduct towards employees.[78][79][80]On June 8, 2018, it was announced that Lasseter would leave Disney Animation and Pixar at the end of the year, but would take on a consulting role until then.[81]Pete Docter was announced as Lasseter's replacement as chief creative officer of Pixar on June 19, 2018.[82]

## Sequels and financial success (2018–2019)
On June 15, 2018,Incredibles 2was released, setting a record for widest opening weekend worldwide and domestic for an animated film.[83]The film would eventually gross $1.2 billion worldwide.[84]On October 23, 2018, it was announced that Catmull would be retiring. He stayed in an adviser role until July 2019.[85]On January 18, 2019, it was announced that Lee Unkrich would be leaving Pixar after 25 years although he would return to the studio a few years later.[86][87]On June 21, 2019,Toy Story 4was released, surpassing the widest opening worldwide weekend record thatIncredibles 2set.[88]The film would make over $1 billion and win the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature.[89][90]During the2019 D23 Expo, Pixar announced that their next film,Soul, would release in 2020.[91]Ahead of the launch ofDisney+, Pixar debutedSparkShorts, experimental shorts done by Pixar staff.[92]

## COVID-19 pandemic, Disney+ releases, and some financial struggles (2020–present)
Pixar releasedOnwardon March 6, 2020. However, due to the start of theCOVID-19 pandemic, the film underperformed at the box office and was released onto rental digital services on March 20, and later onDisney+on April 3.[93]Due to the pandemic,Soulwas moved to November 2020, and ultimately released on December 25, 2020, on Disney+ at no additional cost to subscribers, and later became the first animated streaming film to win theAcademy Award for Best Animated Feature.[94]Pixar's next two features,LucaandTurning Red, were also released free on Disney+ in June 2021 and March 2022, respectively.[95][96]In 2021, several Pixar employees anonymously criticized Disney's decision to release their films direct to Disney+.[97]
Lightyear, Pixar's first movie to return to theaters, was released in June 2022. The film became abox-office failurewithDeadline Hollywoodcalculating the film lost the studio $136 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues.[98]In September 2022, Jonas Rivera was promoted to Executive VP of Film Production at Pixar overseeing all film and streaming production.[99]In December 2022, Disney CEO Bob Iger noted that they would rely more on the Pixar brand.[100]In June 2023, Disney laid off 75 employees including the director ofLightyearAngus MacLane, and the film's producer Galyn Susman.[101]
During that same month,Elementalwas released. During the film's opening weekend, Docter stated that Pixar "trained audiences that these films will be available for you on Disney+".[102]Despite opening below projections,Elementalultimately made a box office comeback by early August 2023, crossing $430 million at the worldwide box office. Disney'sEVPof Theatrical Distribution Tony Chambers stated "After a disappointing opening weekend, we're really pleased that audiences have discovered what a great movie it is."[103]That same month, Morris said "at the box office we're looking at now, [the film] should do better than break even theatrically. And then we have revenue fromstreaming,theme parksandconsumer products. This will certainly be a profitable film for the Disney company."[104]In December 2023, it was announced thatSoul,Turning RedandLucawould be released in theaters in the United States in the first quarter of 2024.[105]
In January 2024, it was reported that Pixar's staff would face imminent layoffs by 20 percent, reducing the studio's workforce to less than 1,000 employees.[106][107]However, the layoffs were then delayed and did not occur, reportedly because of production schedules.[108]In May 2024, the studio proceeded with slightly smaller layoffs: 175 employees or approximately 14 percent of the studio's workforce of over 1,300 employees.[108][109]The layoffs occurred as the studio began to rely less on direct-to-streaming series and more on feature films intended primarily for theatrical exhibition.[108][109]
On June 14 of the same year,Inside Out 2was released and became financially successful. The film had a domestic opening of $165 million, the third highest for an animated film, and the biggest global opening for an animated movie with $319 million. Since then,Inside Out 2broke multiple box office records. It had the highest second weekend gross for an animated film with $100 million, being the first to reach the six-digit second opening weekend. It became the fastest animated movie to reach $1 billion at the global box office, reaching the milestone in 17 days. It also out-grossedIncredibles 2to become the highest grossing Pixar film.Inside Out 2becamethe highest-grossing animated film, and the 8th-highest-grossing film of all time at the end of its theatrical run.[110]Dream Productions, anInside Outspin off series set between the first and second film, was released on December 11, 2024, on Disney+.[111]
In June 2025, Pixar released their next filmElio. The film had the lowest box office opening for a Pixar film to date, earning $25 million,[112]and an all-time low global opening of $39 million.[113]In an op-ed, Rebecca Rubin forVarietynoted thatEliofaced stiff box office competition against the 2025 live-action remakes ofHow to Train Your Dragonand Disney'sLilo & Stitch. Shawn Robbins forFandangoobserved, "Competition from family audiences was difficult to overcome. It makes you wonder howEliowould have performed in the spring, or even a week or two later."[114]Rubin wrote that similar toElemental,Eliocould have steady box office longevity thanks to favorable reviews and positive word-of-mouth.[114]However,Eliounderperformed at the box office, earning $154 million worldwide.[115][116]On September 17, 2025,Eliobegan streaming on Disney+ and became one of the top-streaming titles for that week.[117]

## Campus
WhenSteve Jobs, chief executive officer of Apple Inc. and Pixar, andJohn Lasseter, executive vice president of Pixar, decided to move their studios from a leased space inPoint Richmond, California, to larger quarters of their own, they chose a 20-acresite inEmeryville, California,[118]formerly occupied byDel Monte Foods, Inc. The first of several buildings, the high-tech structure designed byBohlin Cywinski Jackson[119]has specialfoundationsandelectricity generatorsto ensure continued film production, even through majorearthquakes. The character of the building is intended to abstractly recall Emeryville's industrial past. The two-story steel-and-masonry building is a collaborative space with many pathways.[120]
The digital revolution in filmmaking was driven byapplied mathematics, includingcomputational physicsandgeometry.[121]In 2008, this led Pixar senior scientist Tony DeRose to offer to host the secondJulia Robinson Mathematics Festivalat the Emeryville campus.[122]

## Traditions
Some of Pixar's first animators were formercel animatorsincluding John Lasseter, and others came fromcomputer animationor were fresh college graduates.[123]A large number of animators that make up its animation department had been hired around the releases ofA Bug's Life(1998),Monsters, Inc.(2001), andFinding Nemo(2003). The success ofToy Story(1995) made Pixar the first major computer-animation studio to successfully produce theatrical feature films. The majority of the animation industry was (and still is) located in Los Angeles, and Pixar is located 350 miles (560 km) north in theSan Francisco Bay Area. Traditional hand-drawn animation was still the dominant medium for feature animated films.[citation needed]
With the scarcity of Los Angeles-based animators willing to move their families so far north to give up traditional animation and try computer animation, Pixar's new hires at this time either came directly from college or had worked outside feature animation. For traditional animators, the Pixar animation softwareMarionettewas designed to require minimal training before becoming productive.[123]
In a 2007 interview withPBStalk show hostTavis Smiley,[124]Lasseter said that Pixar's films follow the same theme of self-improvement as the company itself has: with the help of friends or family, a character ventures out into the real world and learns to appreciate his friends and family. At the core, Lasseter said, "it's gotta be about the growth of the main character and how he changes."[124]
ActorJohn Ratzenberger, who had previously starred in the television seriesCheers(1982–1993), has voiced a character in every Pixar feature film fromToy StorythroughOnward(2020). A non-speaking background character inSoul(2020) bears his likeness. Pixar paid tribute to Ratzenberger in the end credits ofCars(2006) by parodying scenes from three of its earlier films (Toy Story,Monsters, Inc., andA Bug's Life), replacing all of the characters with motor vehicle versions of them and giving each film an automotive-based title. After the third scene,Mack(his character inCars) realizes that the same actor has been voicing characters in every film.[citation needed]
Due to the traditions that have occurred within the films and shorts such asanthropomorphiccreatures and objects, andeaster eggcrossovers between films and shorts that have been spotted by Pixar fans, a blog post titledThe Pixar Theorywas published in 2013 by Jon Negroni, and popularized by the YouTube channel Super Carlin Brothers,[125]proposing that all of the characters within the Pixar universe were related, surrounding Boo fromMonsters Inc.and the Witch fromBrave(2012).[126][127][128]
Additionally, Pixar is known for their films having expensive budgets, ranging from $150–200 million. Some of these films includeRatatouille(2007),Toy Story 3(2010),Toy Story 4(2019),Incredibles 2(2018),Inside Out(2015),Inside Out 2(2024),The Good Dinosaur(2015),Onward,Soul(both 2020),Turning Red,Lightyear(both 2022),Elemental(2023), andElio(2025). In a 2023 interview, Pixar's presidentJim Morrisstated that one of the reasons why their films have expensive budgets is because they are produced entirely in the U.S. with all of the artists under one roof, while almost all of their competitors keep costs down by doing work offshore.[104]

## Sequels and prequels
As of March 2025, seven Pixar films have received or will receive sequels or prequels. These films areToy Story,Cars,Monsters, Inc.,Finding Nemo,The Incredibles,Inside Out, andCoco.[citation needed]
Toy Story 2was originally commissioned by Disney as a 60-minutedirect-to-videofilm. Expressing doubts about the strength of the material, John Lasseter convinced the Pixar team to start from scratch and make the sequel their third full-length feature film.[citation needed]
Following the release ofToy Story 2in 1999, Pixar and Disney had agentlemen's agreementthat Disney would not make any sequels without Pixar's involvement though retaining a right to do so. After the two companies were unable to agree on a new deal, Disney announced in 2004 they would plan to move forward on sequels with or without Pixar and putToy Story 3into pre-production at Disney's then-new CGI divisionCircle Seven Animation. However, when Lasseter was placed in charge of all Disney and Pixar animation following Disney's acquisition of Pixar in 2006, he put all sequels on hold andToy Story 3was canceled. In May 2006, it was announced thatToy Story 3was back in pre-production with a new plot and under Pixar's control. The film was released on June 18, 2010, as Pixar's eleventh feature film.[citation needed]
Shortly after announcing the resurrection ofToy Story 3, Lasseter stated, "If we have a great story, we'll do a sequel."[129]Cars 2, Pixar's first non-Toy Storysequel, was officially announced in April 2008 and released on June 24, 2011, as their twelfth.Monsters University, a prequel toMonsters, Inc.(2001), was announced in April 2010 and initially set for release in November 2012;[130]the release date was pushed to June 21, 2013, due to Pixar's past success with summer releases, according to a Disney executive.[131]
In June 2011,Tom Hanks, who voicedWoodyin theToy Storyseries, implied thatToy Story 4was "in the works", although it had not yet been confirmed by the studio.[132][133]In April 2013,Finding Dory, a sequel toFinding Nemo, was announced for a June 17, 2016, release.[134]In March 2014,Incredibles 2andCars 3were announced as films in development.[135]In November 2014,Toy Story 4was confirmed to be in development with Lasseter serving as director.[136]However, in July 2017, Lasseter announced that he had stepped down, leavingJosh Cooleyas sole director.[137]Released in June 2019,Toy Story 4ranks among the 40 top-grossing films inAmerican cinema.[138]
On July 3, 2016, Pixar presidentJim Morrisannounced that the studio might be moving away from sequels afterToy Story 4.[139]This was affirmed by producer Mark Nielsen in May 2019.[140]Shortly after its release, Pixar's chief creative officerPete Docterconfirmed that the studio would take a break from sequels and focus on original projects. However, in a later interview, Docter said the studio would have to return to making sequels at some point for its "financial safety".[141]In September 2022, during the D23 Expo, Docter andAmy Poehler(voice ofJoyinInside Out) confirmed thatInside Out 2was in development, with the film being released on June 14, 2024.[142]In February 2023, Disney CEOBob Igerannounced thatToy Story 5was in development, aiming for a 2026 release.[143][144]In August 2024, during the D23 Expo, Docter announced thatIncredibles 3is in development, withBrad Birdreturning to develop.[145]
That same month, on the subject of making a sequel, Docter stated "I want to make it because we have something new to say with these characters. And there's been a number of films that we would love to have a sequel to, that we couldn't find something."[146]
In March 2025, Iger announced thatCoco 2is in development.Lee UnkrichandAdrian Molinaare returning as directors respectively while Mark Nielsen is producing.[147]As of March 2025[update], it is tentatively scheduled for release in 2029.[148]

## Adaptation to television
Toy Storyis the first Pixar film to be adapted for television as aBuzz Lightyear of Star CommandfilmandTV serieson theUPNtelevision network, nowThe CW.Carsbecame the second with the help ofCars Toons, a series of 3-to-5-minute short films running between regularDisney Channelshow intervals and featuringMaterfromCars.[149]Between 2013 and 2014, Pixar released its first two television specials,Toy Story of Terror![150]andToy Story That Time Forgot.Monsters at Work, a television series spin-off ofMonsters, Inc.produced byDisney Television Animation, premiered in July 2021 onDisney+.[151][152]
On December 10, 2020, it was announced that three series would be released on Disney+. The firstDug Days(featuring Dug fromUp(2009)), which premiered on September 1, 2021.[153]The second, aCarsshow titledCars on the Road, which follows Mater andLightning McQueenas they go on a road trip.[153][154]It premiered on Disney+ on September 8, 2022.[155]An original show entitledWin or Lose, which follows a middle school softball team the week leading up to the big championship game where each episode is from a different perspective, premiered on Disney+ on February 19, 2025.[153][156][111]
A TV series based onInside Outwas announced to be in development for Disney+ in June 2023, withSoulco-writerMike Joneshired as developer.[157]The series, titledDream Productions, premiered on Disney+ on December 11, 2024.[111]
On August 8, 2025, it was announced that a series is being developed as the third series in theCarsfranchise, titledCars: Lightning Racers. It is set to be released onDisney Jr.in 2027.[158]

## 2D animation and live-action
The Pixar filmography to date has been computer-animated features. So far,WALL-E(2008) has been the only Pixar film not to be completely animated as it features a small amount of live-action, including footage from the 1969 filmHello, Dolly!while the short filmsYour Friend the Rat(2007),Day & Night(2010),Kitbull(2019),Burrow(2020), andTwenty Something(2021) feature2D animation.1906, the live-action film byBrad Birdbased on a screenplay and novel by James Dalessandro about the1906 earthquake, was in development but has since been abandoned by Bird and Pixar. Bird has stated that he was "interested in moving into the live-action realm with some projects" while "staying at Pixar [because] it's a very comfortable environment for me to work in". In June 2018, Bird mentioned the possibility of adapting the novel as a TV series, and the earthquake sequence as a live-action feature film.[159]
TheToy Story ToonsshortHawaiian Vacation(2011) also includes the fish and shark as live-action.[citation needed]
Jim Morris, president of Pixar, producedDisney'sJohn Carter(2012) whichAndrew Stantonco-wrote and directed.[160]
Pixar's creative heads were consulted to fine tune the script for the 2011 live-action filmThe Muppets.[161]Similarly, Pixar assisted in the story development of Disney'sThe Jungle Book(2016) as well as providing suggestions for the film's end credits sequence.[162]Both Pixar andMark Andrewswere given a "Special Thanks" credit in the film's credits.[163]Additionally, many Pixar animators, both former and current, were recruited for a traditional hand-drawn animated sequence for the 2018 filmMary Poppins Returns.[164]
Pixar representatives have also assisted in the English localization of severalStudio Ghiblifilms, mainly those fromHayao Miyazaki.[165]
In 2019, Pixar developed a live-actionhidden camerareality show, titledPixar in Real Life, forDisney+.[166]

## Upcoming films
Eight upcoming films have been announced: sequelToy Story 5, directed by Andrew Stanton and scheduled to be released on June 19, 2026;[144][167]original filmGatto, directed byEnrico Casarosaand scheduled to be released on March 5, 2027;[168][169]original filmOno Ghost Market, directed byTrevor Jimenezand scheduled to be released on March 10, 2028; sequelIncredibles 3, directed byPeter Sohnand scheduled to be released on June 16, 2028;[170][145]sequelCoco 2, directed byAdrian MolinaandLee Unkrichand scheduled to be released on November 21, 2029;[171][172]an untitled musical directed byDomee Shi, and a third film in theMonsters, Inc.franchise.[173][174]

## Highest-grossing films
‡—Includes theatrical reissue(s).

## Co-op Program
The Pixar Co-op Program, a part of the Pixar University professional development program, allows their animators to use Pixar resources to produce independent films.[175][176]The first 3D project accepted to the program wasBorrowed Time(2016); all previously accepted films were live-action.[177]