## Plasma (physics)
Plasma(fromAncient Greekπλάσμα(plásma)[1][a]'that which has been formed or mouldedorthe result of forming ormoulding'[2]) is astate of matterthat results from agaseousstate having undergone some degree ofionization. It thus consists of a significant portion ofcharged particles(ionsand/orelectrons). While rarely encountered onEarth, it is estimated that 99.9% of allordinary matterin theuniverseis plasma.[3]Starsare almost pure balls of plasma, and plasma dominates the rarefiedintracluster mediumandintergalactic medium.[4][5][6][7]Plasma can be artificially generated, for example, by heating a neutral gas or subjecting it to a strongelectromagnetic field.[8]
The presence of charged particles makes plasmaelectrically conductive, with the dynamics of individual particles and macroscopic plasma motion governed by collective electromagnetic fields and very sensitive to externally applied fields.[9]The response of plasma to electromagnetic fields is used in many modern devices and technologies, such asplasma televisionsorplasma etching.[10]
Depending on temperature and density, a certain number of neutral particles may also be present, in which case plasma is calledpartially ionized.Neon signsandlightningare examples of partially ionized plasmas.[11]
Unlike thephase transitionsbetween the other three states of matter, the transition to plasma is not well defined and is a matter of interpretation and context.[12]Whether a given degree of ionization suffices to call a substance "plasma" depends on the specific phenomenon being considered.

## Early history
While a student at the age of 24, in 1816,Michael Faradaydelievered a series oflectureswith one of them titled"On Radiant Matter"where he hypothesised about the existence of such a matter, distinguished from the gaseous form "as far beyond vaporisation as that is above fluidity". He further expanded on this notion in 1819, listing it—while admitting being purely hypothetical—among "the four states of matter". One finds in the notes to this lecture "Reasons for belief in existence. Experimental evidence. Kinds of radiant matter admitted."[13], likely related to the light he observed in electrical discharges in air and other gases at different pressures.[14]
Plasma was first identified in laboratory bySir William Crookes, who presented a lecture to theBritish Association for the Advancement of Science, in Sheffield, on Friday, 22 August 1879.[15]Crookes used the "radiant matter" term, paying tribute to Faraday and his far-reaching speculations.
Systematic studies of plasma began with the research ofIrving Langmuirand his colleagues in the 1920s. Langmuir also introduced the term "plasma" as a description of ionized gas in 1928:[16]
Except near the electrodes, where there aresheathscontaining very few electrons, the ionized gas contains ions and electrons in about equal numbers so that the resultant space charge is very small. We shall use the nameplasmato describe this region containing balanced charges of ions and electrons.
Lewi Tonksand Harold Mott-Smith, both of whom worked with Langmuir in the 1920s, recall that Langmuir first used the term by analogy with theblood plasma.[17][18]Mott-Smith recalls, in particular, that the transport of electrons from thermionic filaments reminded Langmuir of "the way blood plasma carries red and white corpuscles and germs."[19]

## The fourth state of matter
Plasma is called thefourthstate of matteraftersolid,liquid, andgas.[20][21][22]It is a state of matter in which anionizedsubstance becomes highlyelectrically conductiveto the point that long-rangeelectric and magnetic fieldsdominate its behaviour.[23][24]
Plasma is typically an electrically quasineutral medium of unbound positive and negativeparticles(i.e., the overall charge of a plasma is roughly zero). Although these particles are unbound, they are not "free" in the sense of not experiencing forces. Moving charged particles generateelectric currents, and any movement of achargedplasma particle affects and is affected by thefieldscreated by the other charges. In turn, this governs collective behaviour with many degrees of variation.[25][26]
Plasma is distinct from the other states of matter. In particular, describing a low-density plasma as merely an "ionized gas" is wrong and misleading, even though it is similar to the gas phase in that both assume no definite shape or volume. The following table summarizes some principal differences:

## Ideal plasma
Three factors define an ideal plasma:[28][29]

## Non-neutral plasma
The strength and range of the electric force and the good conductivity of plasmas usually ensure that the densities of positive and negative charges in any sizeable region are equal ("quasineutrality"). A plasma with a significant excess of charge density, or, in the extreme case, is composed of a single species, is called anon-neutral plasma. In such a plasma, electric fields play a dominant role. Examples are chargedparticle beams, an electron cloud in aPenning trapand positron plasmas.[34]

## Dusty plasma
Adusty plasmacontains tiny charged particles of dust (typically found in space). The dust particles acquire high charges and interact with each other. A plasma that contains larger particles is called grain plasma. Under laboratory conditions, dusty plasmas are also calledcomplex plasmas.[35]

## Density and ionization degree
For plasma to exist,ionizationis necessary. The term "plasma density" by itself usually refers to the electron densityne{\displaystyle n_{e}}, that is, the number of charge-contributing electrons per unit volume. The degree of ionizationα{\displaystyle \alpha }is defined as the fraction of neutral particles that are ionized:
α=nini+nn,{\displaystyle \alpha ={\frac {n_{i}}{n_{i}+n_{n}}},}
whereni{\displaystyle n_{i}}is the ion density andnn{\displaystyle n_{n}}the neutral density (in number of particles per unit volume). In the case of fully ionized matter,α=1{\displaystyle \alpha =1}. Because of the quasineutrality of plasma, the electron and ion densities are related byne=⟨Zi⟩ni{\displaystyle n_{e}=\langle Z_{i}\rangle n_{i}}, where⟨Zi⟩{\displaystyle \langle Z_{i}\rangle }is the average ion charge (in units of theelementary charge).

## Temperature
Plasma temperature, commonly measured inkelvinorelectronvolts, is a measure of the thermal kinetic energy per particle. High temperatures are usually needed to sustain ionization, which is a defining feature of a plasma. The degree of plasma ionization is determined by theelectron temperaturerelative to theionization energy(and more weakly by the density). Inthermal equilibrium, the relationship is given by theSaha equation. At low temperatures, ions and electrons tend to recombine into bound states—atoms[37]—and the plasma will eventually become a gas.
In most cases, the electrons and heavy plasma particles (ions and neutral atoms) separately have a relatively well-defined temperature; that is, their energydistribution functionis close to aMaxwellianeven in the presence of strongelectricormagneticfields. However, because of the large difference in mass between electrons and ions, their temperatures may be different, sometimes significantly so. This is especially common in weakly ionized technological plasmas, where the ions are often near theambient temperaturewhile electrons reach thousands of kelvin.[38]The opposite case is thez-pinchplasma where the ion temperature may exceed that of electrons.[39]

## Plasma potential
Since plasmas are very goodelectrical conductors, electric potentials play an important role.[clarification needed]The average potential in the space between charged particles, independent of how it can be measured, is called the "plasma potential", or the "space potential". If an electrode is inserted into a plasma, its potential will generally lie considerably below the plasma potential due to what is termed aDebye sheath. The good electrical conductivity of plasmas makes their electric fields very small. This results in the important concept of "quasineutrality", which says the density of negative charges is approximately equal to the density of positive charges over large volumes of the plasma (ne=⟨Z⟩ni{\displaystyle n_{e}=\langle Z\rangle n_{i}}), but on the scale of theDebye length, there can be charge imbalance. In the special case thatdouble layersare formed, the charge separation can extend some tens of Debye lengths.[41]
The magnitude of the potentials and electric fields must be determined by means other than simply finding the netcharge density. A common example is to assume that the electrons satisfy theBoltzmann relation:ne∝exp⁡(eΦ/kBTe).{\displaystyle n_{e}\propto \exp(e\Phi /k_{\text{B}}T_{e}).}
Differentiating this relation provides a means to calculate the electric field from the density:E→=kBTee∇nene.{\displaystyle {\vec {E}}={\frac {k_{\text{B}}T_{e}}{e}}{\frac {\nabla n_{e}}{n_{e}}}.}
It is possible to produce a plasma that is not quasineutral. An electron beam, for example, has only negative charges. The density of a non-neutral plasma must generally be very low, or it must be very small, otherwise, it will be dissipated by the repulsiveelectrostatic force.[42]

## Magnetization
The existence of charged particles causes the plasma to generate, and be affected by,magnetic fields. Plasma with a magnetic field strong enough to influence the motion of the charged particles is said to be magnetized. A common quantitative criterion is that a particle on average completes at least one gyration around the magnetic-field line before making a collision, i.e.,νce/νcoll>1{\displaystyle \nu _{\mathrm {ce} }/\nu _{\mathrm {coll} }>1}, whereνce{\displaystyle \nu _{\mathrm {ce} }}is the electrongyrofrequencyandνcoll{\displaystyle \nu _{\mathrm {coll} }}is the electron collision rate. It is often the case that the electrons are magnetized while the ions are not. Magnetized plasmas areanisotropic, meaning that their properties in the direction parallel to the magnetic field are different from those perpendicular to it. While electric fields in plasmas are usually small due to the plasma high conductivity, the electric field associated with a plasma moving with velocityv{\displaystyle \mathbf {v} }in the magnetic fieldB{\displaystyle \mathbf {B} }is given by the usualLorentz formulaE=−v×B{\displaystyle \mathbf {E} =-\mathbf {v} \times \mathbf {B} }, and is not affected byDebye shielding.[43]

## Mathematical descriptions
To completely describe the state of a plasma, all of the particle locations and velocities that describe the electromagnetic field in the plasma region would need to be written down. However, it is generally not practical or necessary to keep track of all the particles in a plasma.[citation needed]Therefore, plasma physicists commonly use less detailed descriptions, of which there are two main types:

## Fluid model
Fluid models describe plasmas in terms of smoothed quantities, like density and averaged velocity around each position (seePlasma parameters). One simple fluid model,magnetohydrodynamics, treats the plasma as a single fluid governed by a combination ofMaxwell's equationsand theNavier–Stokes equations. A more general description is the two-fluid plasma,[45]where the ions and electrons are described separately. Fluid models are often accurate when collisionality is sufficiently high to keep the plasma velocity distribution close to aMaxwell–Boltzmann distribution. Because fluid models usually describe the plasma in terms of a single flow at a certain temperature at each spatial location, they can neither capture velocity space structures like beams ordouble layers, nor resolve wave-particle effects.[citation needed]

## Kinetic model
Kinetic models describe the particle velocity distribution function at each point in the plasma and therefore do not need to assume aMaxwell–Boltzmann distribution. A kinetic description is often necessary for collisionless plasmas. There are two common approaches to kinetic description of a plasma. One is based on representing the smoothed distribution function on a grid in velocity and position. The other, known as theparticle-in-cell(PIC) technique, includes kinetic information by following the trajectories of a large number of individual particles. Kinetic models are generally more computationally intensive than fluid models. TheVlasov equationmay be used to describe the dynamics of a system of charged particles interacting with an electromagnetic field.
In magnetized plasmas, agyrokineticapproach can substantially reduce the computational expense of a fully kinetic simulation.[citation needed]

## Plasma science and technology
Plasmas are studied by the vastacademic fieldofplasma scienceorplasma physics, including several sub-disciplines such asspace plasma physics.
Plasmas can appear in nature in various forms and locations, with a few examples given in the following table:

## Space and astrophysics
Plasma constitutes more than 99% of matter observed inthe visible universe.[46]Above the Earth's surface, theionosphereis a plasma,[47]and themagnetospherecontains plasma.[48]Within the Solar System,interplanetary spaceis filled with the plasma expelled via thesolar wind, extending from the Sun's surface out to theheliopause. Furthermore, all the distantstars, and much ofinterstellar spaceorintergalactic spaceis also filled with plasma, albeit at very low densities.Astrophysical plasmasare also observed inaccretion disksaround stars or compact objects likewhite dwarfs,neutron stars, orblack holesin closebinary starsystems.[49]Plasma is associated with ejection of material inastrophysical jets, which have been observed with accreting black holes[50]or in activegalaxieslikeM87's jetthat possibly extends out to 5,000 light-years.[51]

## Artificial plasmas
Most artificial plasmas are generated by the application of electric and/or magnetic fields through a gas. Plasma generated in a laboratory setting and for industrial use can be generally categorized by:

## Generation of artificial plasma
Just like the many uses of plasma, there are several means for its generation. However, one principle is common to all of them: there must be energy input to produce and sustain it.[52]For this case, plasma is generated when anelectric currentis applied across adielectric gasor fluid (an electricallynon-conductingmaterial) as can be seen in the adjacent image, which shows adischarge tubeas a simple example (DCused for simplicity).[citation needed]
Thepotential differenceand subsequentelectric fieldpull the bound electrons (negative) toward theanode(positive electrode) while thecathode(negative electrode) pulls the nucleus.[53]As thevoltageincreases, the current stresses the material (byelectric polarization) beyond itsdielectric limit(termed strength) into a stage ofelectrical breakdown, marked by anelectric spark, where the material transforms from being aninsulatorinto aconductor(as it becomes increasinglyionized). The underlying process is theTownsend avalanche, where collisions between electrons and neutral gas atoms create more ions and electrons (as can be seen in the figure on the right). The first impact of an electron on an atom results in one ion and two electrons. Therefore, the number of charged particles increases rapidly (in the millions) only "after about 20 successive sets of collisions",[54]mainly due to a small mean free path (average distance travelled between collisions).[citation needed]

## Electric arc
Electric arcis a continuous electric discharge between two electrodes, similar tolightning.
With ample current density, the discharge forms a luminous arc, where the inter-electrode material (usually, a gas) undergoes various stages — saturation, breakdown, glow, transition, and thermal arc. The voltage rises to its maximum in the saturation stage, and thereafter it undergoes fluctuations of the various stages, while the current progressively increases throughout.[54]Electrical resistancealong the arc createsheat, which dissociates more gas molecules and ionizes the resulting atoms. Therefore, theelectrical energyis given to electrons, which, due to their great mobility and large numbers, are able to disperse it rapidly byelastic collisionsto the heavy particles.[55]

## Examples of industrial plasma
Plasmas find applications in many fields of research, technology and industry, for example, in industrial and extractivemetallurgy,[55][56]surface treatments such asplasma spraying(coating),etchingin microelectronics,[57]metal cutting[58]andwelding; as well as in everydayvehicle exhaust cleanupandfluorescent/luminescentlamps,[52]fuel ignition, and even insupersonic combustion enginesforaerospace engineering.[59]

## MHD converters
A world effort was triggered in the 1960s to studymagnetohydrodynamic convertersin order to bringMHD power conversionto market with commercial power plants of a new kind, converting thekinetic energyof a high velocity plasma intoelectricitywith nomoving partsat a highefficiency. Research was also conducted in the field of supersonic and hypersonic aerodynamics to study plasma interaction with magnetic fields to eventually achieve passive and even activeflow controlaround vehicles or projectiles, in order to soften and mitigateshock waves, lower thermal transfer and reducedrag.[citation needed]
Such ionized gases used in "plasma technology" ("technological" or "engineered" plasmas) are usuallyweakly ionized gasesin the sense that only a tiny fraction of the gas molecules are ionized.[70]These kinds of weakly ionized gases are also nonthermal "cold" plasmas. In the presence of magnetics fields, the study of such magnetized nonthermal weakly ionized gases involvesresistive magnetohydrodynamicswith lowmagnetic Reynolds number, a challenging field of plasma physics where calculations requiredyadic tensorsin a7-dimensionalphase space. When used in combination with a highHall parameter, a critical value triggers the problematicelectrothermal instabilitywhich limited these technological developments.[citation needed]

## Complex plasma phenomena
Although the underlying equations governing plasmas are relatively simple, plasma behaviour is extraordinarily varied and subtle: the emergence of unexpected behaviour from a simple model is a typical feature of acomplex system. Such systems lie in some sense on the boundary between ordered and disordered behaviour and cannot typically be described either by simple, smooth, mathematical functions, or by pure randomness. The spontaneous formation of interesting spatial features on a wide range of length scales is one manifestation of plasma complexity. The features are interesting, for example, because they are very sharp, spatially intermittent (the distance between features is much larger than the features themselves), or have afractalform. Many of these features were first studied in the laboratory, and have subsequently been recognized throughout the universe.[citation needed]Examples of complexity and complex structures in plasmas include:

## Filamentation
Striations or string-like structures[71]are seen in many plasmas, like theplasma ball, theaurora,[72]lightning,[73]electric arcs,solar flares,[74]andsupernova remnants.[75]They are sometimes associated with larger current densities, and the interaction with the magnetic field can form amagnetic ropestructure.[76](See alsoPlasma pinch)
Filamentation also refers to the self-focusing of a high power laser pulse. At high powers, the nonlinear part of theindex of refractionbecomes important and causes a higher index of refraction in the center of the laser beam, where the laser is brighter than at the edges, causing a feedback that focuses the laser even more. The tighter focused laser has a higher peak brightness (irradiance) that forms a plasma. The plasma has an index of refraction lower than one, and causes a defocusing of the laser beam. The interplay of the focusing index of refraction, and the defocusing plasma makes the formation of a long filament of plasma that can bemicrometersto kilometers in length.[77]One interesting aspect of the filamentation generated plasma is the relatively low ion density due to defocusing effects of the ionized electrons.[78](See alsoFilament propagation)

## Impermeable plasma
Impermeable plasma is a type of thermal plasma which acts like an impermeable solid with respect to gas or cold plasma and can be physically pushed. Interaction of cold gas and thermal plasma was briefly studied by a group led byHannes Alfvénin 1960s and 1970s for its possible applications in insulation offusionplasma from the reactor walls.[79]However, later it was found that the externalmagnetic fieldsin this configuration could inducekink instabilitiesin the plasma and subsequently lead to an unexpectedly high heat loss to the walls.[80]
In 2013, a group of materials scientists reported that they have successfully generated stable impermeable plasma with nomagnetic confinementusing only an ultrahigh-pressure blanket of cold gas. While spectroscopic data on the characteristics of plasma were claimed to be difficult to obtain due to the high pressure, the passive effect of plasma onsynthesisof differentnanostructuresclearly suggested the effective confinement. They also showed that upon maintaining the impermeability for a few tens of seconds, screening ofionsat the plasma-gas interface could give rise to a strong secondary mode of heating (known as viscous heating) leading to different kinetics of reactions and formation of complexnanomaterials.[81]