## Portuguese language
Portuguese(endonym:portuguêsorlíngua portuguesa) is aWestern Romance languageof theIndo-European language familyoriginating from theIberian PeninsulaofEurope. It is spoken chiefly in Portugal, in Brazil, and in several African countries, as well as by immigrants in North America, Europe, and South America. With approximately 267 million speakers, it is listed as thefifth-most spoken native language.
Portuguese-speaking people or nations are known asLusophone(lusófono). As a result of expansion during colonial times, a cultural presence of Portuguese speakers is also found around the world. Portuguese is part of theIbero-Romance group, which evolved from several dialects ofVulgar Latinin the medievalKingdom of Galiciaand theCounty of Portugal, and has retained someCelticphonology.[7][8]
Portuguese language structure reflects both its Latin roots and centuries of outside influences. These are seen inphonology,orthography,grammar, andvocabulary. Phonologically, Portuguese has a rich system ofnasal vowels, complex consonant variations, and different types ofguttural R– as well as other sounds in its European and Brazilian varieties. Its spelling, based similarly to English on theLatin alphabet, is largelyphonemicbut is influenced byetymologyand tradition.Recent spelling reformshave attempted to create a unified spelling for the Portuguese language acrossall countries that use it. Portuguese grammar retains manyLatin verb forms, and possesses several unique features (such as thefuture subjunctiveand thepersonal infinitive). Its vocabulary is derived largely from Latin, but also includesnumerous loanwords[pt]from Celtic, Germanic, Arabic, African, Amerindian, and Asian languages, resulting from historical contact based on wars, trade, andcolonization.
There is significantvariationin the dialects of Portuguese worldwide, with two primarystandardized varieties:European PortugueseandBrazilian Portuguese, each one having numerousregional accentsandsubdialects. African and Asian varieties generally follow the European written standard, though these will often display differentphonological,lexical, and sometimes evensyntactic features. While there is broadmutual intelligibilityamong the assorted lusophone population, variation may be observed in speech patterns, vocabulary, or grammar.

## Origins
When theRomansarrived in theIberian Peninsulain 216 BC, they brought with them theLatin language, from which allRomance languagesare descended. The language was spread by Roman commoners, merchants, and soldiers, who built Roman cities mostly near the settlements of previousCelticcivilizations established long before the Roman arrivals. For that reason, the language has kept a relevant substratum of much older,Atlantic EuropeanMegalithic Culture[9]andCeltic culture,[10]part of theHispano-Celtic groupof ancient languages.[11]In Latin, the Portuguese language is known aslusitanaor(latina) lusitanica, after theLusitanians, a pre-Celtic tribe that lived in the territory of present-day Portugal and Spain that adopted the Latin language as Roman settlers moved in. This is also the origin of theluso-prefix, seen in terms like "Lusophone".

## Germanic Period
Between AD 409 and AD 711, as theRoman Empirecollapsed inWestern Europe, the Iberian Peninsula was conquered byGermanic peoplesof theMigration Period. The occupiers, most notablySuebi[12][13]but alsoVisigothsandBuri[14]originally spokeGermanic languages. Quickly, they adopted late Roman culture and theVulgar Latindialects of the peninsula and over the next 300 years totally integrated into the local population. Some Germanic words from that period are part of the Portuguese lexicon, together with place names, surnames, and first names.

## After the Arab Conquest
With theUmayyad conquestbeginning in 711,Arabicbecame the administrative and common language in the conquered regions, but most of theremaining Christian populationcontinued to speak a form ofIbero-RomancecalledMozarabicwhich introduced a few hundred words from Arabic,Persian,Turkish, andBerber.[15]Like other Neo-Latin and European languages, Portuguese has adopted a significant number ofloanwordsfromGreek,[16]mainly in technical and scientific terminology. These borrowings occurred via Latin, and later during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.
Portuguese evolved from the medieval language spoken in the northwestern medievalKingdom of Galicia, which theCounty of Portugalonce formed part of. This variety has been retrospectively namedGalician–Portuguese, Old Portuguese, or Old Galician by linguists.[17]
It is in Latin administrative documents of the 9th century that written Galician–Portuguese words and phrases are first recorded. This phase is known as Proto-Portuguese, which lasted from the 9th century until the 12th-century independence of theCounty of Portugalfrom theKingdom of León, which had by then assumed reign overGalicia.
In the first part of the Galician–Portuguese period (from the 12th to the 14th century), the language was increasingly used for documents and other written forms. For some time, it was the language of preference forlyric poetryin ChristianHispania, much asOccitanwas the language of the poetry of thetroubadoursin France. The Occitan digraphslhandnh, used in its classical orthography, were adopted by theorthography of Portuguese, presumably byGerald of Braga,[18]a monk fromMoissac, who became bishop ofBragain Portugal in 1047, playing a major role in modernizing written Portuguese using classical Occitan norms.[19]Portugal became an independent kingdom in 1139, under KingAfonso I of Portugal. In 1290, KingDenis of Portugalcreated the first Portuguese university in Lisbon (theEstudos Gerais, which later moved toCoimbra) and decreed for Portuguese, then simply called the "common language", to be known as the Portuguese language and used officially.
In the second period of Old Portuguese, in the 15th and 16th centuries, with thePortuguese discoveries, the language was taken to many regions of Africa, Asia, and theAmericas. By the mid-16th century, Portuguese had become alingua francain Asia and Africa, used not only for colonial administration and trade but also for communication between local officials and Europeans of all nationalities. The Portuguese expanded across South America, across Africa to the Pacific Ocean, taking their language with them.
Its spread was helped by mixed marriages between Portuguese and local people and by its association withRoman Catholicmissionaryefforts, which led to the formation ofcreole languagessuch as that calledKristangin many parts of Asia (from the wordcristão, "Christian"). The language continued to be popular in parts of Asia until the 19th century. Some Portuguese-speaking Christian communities inIndia,Sri Lanka,Malaysia, andIndonesiapreserved their language even after they were isolated from Portugal.
The end of the Old Portuguese period was marked by the publication of theCancioneiro GeralbyGarcia de Resende, in 1516. The early times of Modern Portuguese, which spans the period from the 16th century to the present day, were characterized by an increase in the number of learned words borrowed fromClassical LatinandClassical Greekbecause of theRenaissance(learned words borrowed from Latin also came fromRenaissance Latin, the form of Latin during that time), which greatly enriched the lexicon. Most literate Portuguese speakers were also literate in Latin; and thus they easily adopted Latin words into their writing, and eventually speech, in Portuguese.[20]
Spanish authorMiguel de Cervantesonce called Portuguese "the sweet and gracious language", while the Brazilian poetOlavo Bilacdescribed it asa última flor do Lácio, inculta e bela("the last flower ofLatium, naïve and beautiful").[21][22][23][24][25]Portuguese is also termed "the language of Camões", afterLuís Vaz de Camões, one of the greatest literary figures in the Portuguese language and author of the Portugueseepic poemThe Lusiads.[26][27][28]
In March 2006, theMuseum of the Portuguese Language, an interactive museum about the Portuguese language, was founded inSão Paulo, Brazil, the city with the greatest number of Portuguese language speakers in the world.[29]The museum is the first of its kind in the world.[29]In 2015 the museum was partially destroyed in a fire,[30]but restored and reopened in 2020.[31]

## Geographic distribution
Portuguese is spoken by approximately 200 million people in South America, 30 million in Africa, 15 million in Europe, 5 million in North America and 0.33 million in Asia and Oceania. It is the native language of the vast majority of the people in Portugal,[33]Brazil[34]and São Tomé and Príncipe (95%).[35]Around 45% of the population of urban Angola speaks Portuguese natively,[36]with approximately 85% fluent; these rates are lower in the countryside.[37]Just over 50% (and rapidly increasing) of the population ofMozambiqueare native speakers of Portuguese, and 70% are fluent, according to the 2007 census.[38]Portuguese is also spoken natively by 30% of the population in Guinea-Bissau, and a Portuguese-based creole is understood by all.[39]Almost 50% of the East Timorese are fluent in Portuguese. No data is available for Cape Verde, but almost all the population is bilingual, and the monolingual population speaks the Portuguese-basedCape Verdean Creole. Portuguese is mentioned in theConstitution of South Africaas one of the languages spoken by communities within the country for which thePan South African Language Boardwas charged with promoting and ensuring respect.[40]
There are also significant Portuguese-speaking immigrant communities in many territories includingAndorra(17.1%),[41]Bermuda,[42]Canada(400,275 people in the 2006 census),[43]France(1,625,000 people),[44]Japan(400,000 people),[45]Jersey,[46]Luxembourg(about 25% of the population as of 2021),Namibia(about 4–5% of the population, mainly refugees from Angola in the north of the country),[47]Paraguay(10.7% or 636,000 people),[48]Switzerland(550,000 in 2019, learning + mother tongue),[49]Venezuela(554,000),[50]and the United States (868,900).[51]
In some parts of formerPortuguese India, namelyGoa[52]andDaman and Diu,[53]the language is still spoken by about 10,000 people. In 2014, an estimated 1,500 students were learning Portuguese in Goa.[54]Approximately 2% of the people of Macau, China are fluent speakers of Portuguese. Additionally, the language is being very actively studied in the Chinese school system right up to the doctorate level. TheKristang peopleinMalaysiaspeakKristang, a Portuguese-Malay creole; however, the Portuguese language itself is not widely spoken in the country.

## Official status
TheCommunity of Portuguese Language Countries[55](in PortugueseComunidade dos Países de Língua Portuguesa, with the Portuguese acronym CPLP) consists of the nine independent countries that have Portuguese as anofficial language:Angola,Brazil,Cape Verde,East Timor,Equatorial Guinea,Guinea-Bissau,Mozambique,PortugalandSão Tomé and Príncipe.[55]
Equatorial Guineamade a formal application for full membership to the CPLP in June 2010, a status given only to states with Portuguese as an official language.[56]Portuguese became its third official language (besidesSpanishandFrench)[57]in 2011, and in July 2014, the country was accepted as a member of the CPLP.[58]
Portuguese is also one of the official languages of the Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China of Macau (alongsideChinese) and of several international organizations, includingMercosul,[59]theOrganization of Ibero-American States,[60]theUnion of South American Nations,[61]theOrganization of American States,[62]theAfrican Union,[63]theEconomic Community of West African States,[63]theSouthern African Development Community[63]and theEuropean Union.[64]

## Lusophone countries
According toThe World Factbook's country population estimates for 2018, the population of each of the ten jurisdictions is as follows (by descending order):
The combined population of the entireLusophonearea was estimated at 300 million in January 2022.[67][66][74]This number does not include the Lusophonediaspora, estimated at 10 million people (including 4.5 million Portuguese, 3 million Brazilians), although there are no official accurate figures for diasporic Portuguese speakers because a significant portion of these citizens are naturalized citizens born outside of Lusophone territory or are children of immigrants, and may have only a basic command of the language. Additionally, a large part of the diaspora is a part of the already-counted population of the Portuguese-speaking countries and territories, such as the high number of Brazilian andPALOPemigrant citizens in Portugal or the high number of Portuguese emigrant citizens in the PALOP and Brazil.
The Portuguese language therefore serves more than 250 million people daily, who have direct or indirect legal, juridical and social contact with it, varying from the only language used in any contact, to only education, contact with local or international administration, commerce and services or the simple sight of road signs, public information and advertising in Portuguese.

## Portuguese as a foreign language
Portuguese is a mandatory subject in the school curriculum inUruguay.[75]Other countries where Portuguese is commonly taught in schools or where it has been introduced as an option includeVenezuela,[76]Zambia,[77]theRepublic of the Congo,[78]Senegal,[78]Namibia,[47]Eswatini,[78]South Africa,[78]Ivory Coast,[79]andMauritius.[80]In 2017, a project was launched to introduce Portuguese as a school subject inZimbabwe.[81][82]Also, according to Portugal's Minister of Foreign Affairs, the language will be part of the school curriculum of a total of 32 countries by 2020.[83]In such countries, Portuguese is spoken either as a native language by vast majorities due to their Portuguese colonial past or as alingua francain bordering and multilingual regions, such as on the Brazilian borders of Uruguay and Paraguay and in regions of Angola and Namibia. In many other countries, Portuguese is spoken by majorities as a second language. There remain communities of thousands of Portuguese (orCreole) first language speakers inGoa,Sri Lanka,Kuala Lumpur,Daman and Diu, and other areas due toPortuguese colonization. InEast Timor, the number of Portuguese speakers is quickly increasing as Portuguese and Brazilian teachers are making great strides in teaching Portuguese in the schools all over the island.[84]Additionally, there are many large Portuguese-speaking immigrant communities all over the world.

## Future
According to estimates byUNESCO, Portuguese is the fastest-growingEuropean languageafterEnglishand the language has, according to the newspaperThe Portugal Newspublishing data given from UNESCO, the highest potential for growth as an international language insouthern AfricaandSouth America.[86]Portuguese is a globalized language spoken officially on five continents, and as a second language by millions worldwide.
Since 1991, when Brazil signed into the economic community ofMercosulwith other South American nations, namelyArgentina,UruguayandParaguay, Portuguese is either mandatory, or taught, in the schools of those South American countries.
Although early in the 21st century, afterMacauwas returned toChinaand immigration of Brazilians ofJapanese descenttoJapanslowed down, the use of Portuguese was in decline inAsia, it is once again becoming a language of opportunity there, mostly because of increased diplomatic and financial ties with economically powerful Portuguese-speaking countries in the world.[87][88]

## Current status and importance
Portuguese, being a language spread on all continents, has official status in several international organizations. It is one of twenty official languages of theEuropean Union, an official language of NATO, theOrganization of American States(alongside Spanish, French and English), and one of eighteen official languages of theEuropean Space Agency.
Portuguese is a working language in nonprofit organisations such as theRed Cross(alongside English, German, Spanish, French, Arabic and Russian),Amnesty International(alongside 32 other languages of which English is the most used, followed by Spanish, French, German, and Italian), andMédecins sans Frontières(used alongside English, Spanish, French and Arabic), in addition to being the official legal language in theAfrican Court on Human and Peoples' Rights, also inCommunity of Portuguese Language Countries, an international organization formed essentially bylusophone countries.

## Linguistic demography
With approximately 250 million native speakers and 17 millionsecond languagespeakers, Portuguese has approximately 267 million total speakers.[89]It is usually listed as thefifth-most spoken native language,[90]the third-most spoken European language in the world in terms of native speakers[91]and the second-most spokenRomance languagein the world, surpassed only bySpanish. Being the first most widely spoken language inSouth America[92][93][94]and the most-spoken language in theSouthern Hemisphere,[95][96][97]it is also the second-most spoken language, after Spanish, inLatin America, one of the 10 most spoken languages inAfrica,[98]and an official language of theEuropean Union,Mercosul, theOrganization of American States, theEconomic Community of West African States, theAfrican Union, and theCommunity of Portuguese Language Countries, an international organization made up of all of the world's officiallyLusophonenations. In 1997, a comprehensive academic study ranked Portuguese as one of the 10 most influential languages in the world.[99][100]

## Classification and related languages
Portuguese belongs to theWest Iberianbranch of theRomance languages, and it has special ties with the following members of this group:
Portuguese and other Romance languages (namelyFrenchandItalian) share considerable similarities in both vocabulary and grammar. Portuguese speakers will usually need some formal study before attaining strong comprehension in those Romance languages, and vice versa. However, Portuguese andGalicianare fully mutually intelligible. Spanish is relatively intelligible for lusophones, owing to their geographic proximity and history asWest Iberian(Ibero-Romance languages), historical contact between speakers and mutual influence, sharedareal featuresas well as modern lexical, structural, and grammatical similarity (over 85%) between them.[101][102][103][104][105]Many young Portuguese speakers however, will often chooseEnglishas the lingua-franca of choice, with Spanish, French, Italian, other Europeans, and speakers of other languages. Over 97% of 18 to 24 year olds in Portugal speak a second language fluently, 95% of those have English as L2, some 33.7% speak French, 23% German, and 14% Spanish.[106][107]
Portuñol/Portunhol, a form ofcode-switching, has a lively use and is mentioned in popular culture in South America. Said code-switching is not to be confused with the Portuguese varieties spoken on the borders of Brazil with Uruguay (dialeto do pampa) and Paraguay (dialeto dosbrasiguaios), and of Portugal with Spain (barranquenho), that are Portuguese dialects spoken natively by thousands of people, which have been heavily influenced by Spanish.[108]
Portuguese and Spanish are the only Ibero-Romance languages, and perhaps the only Romance languages in Latin-America, with such thriving inter-language forms, in which visible and lively bilingual contact dialects and code-switching have formed, in which functional bilingual communication is achieved through attempting an approximation to the target foreign language (known as 'Portuñol') without a learned acquisition process, but nevertheless facilitates communication. There is an emerging literature focused on such phenomena in South America (including informal attempts of standardization of the linguistic continua and their usage).[108]

## Galician–Portuguese in Spain
The closest relative of Portuguese is Galician, which is spoken in the autonomous community and historical nationality of Galicia (Spain). The two were part of a common dialect continuum during the Middle Ages, known today asGalician–Portuguese, but they have diverged especially in pronunciation and vocabulary due to the political separation ofPortugalfromGalicia. There is, however, still a linguistic continuity consisting of the variant of Galician referred to asgalego-português baixo-limiao, which is spoken in several Galician and Portuguese villages within the transboundary biosphere reserve ofGerês-Xurés. It is "considered a rarity, a living vestige of the medieval language that ranged fromCantabriatoMondego[...]".[109]As reported byUNESCO, due to the pressure of Spanish on the standard official version of Galician and centuries-oldCastilianization, the Galician language was on the verge of disappearing.[109]
According to the UNESCO philologist Tapani Salminen, the proximity to Portuguese protects Galician.[110]The core vocabulary and grammar of Galician are noticeably closer to Portuguese than to those of Spanish. Within the EU, Galician, while not being aEuropean Parliamentofficial language, can be used and is in fact used by some European Parliament constituents due to its similarity with Portuguese.[111][112]Galician like Portuguese, uses the future subjunctive, the personal infinitive, and the synthetic pluperfect. Mutual intelligibility estimated at 85% is excellent between Galicians and Portuguese.[113]Despite political efforts in Spain to define them as separate languages, many linguists considerGalicianand Portuguese to be co-dialects of the same language with regional variations.[114][112]
Another member of the Galician–Portuguese group, most commonly thought of as a Galician dialect, is spoken in theEonavianregion in a western strip inAsturiasand the westernmost parts of the provinces ofLeónandZamora, along the frontier with Galicia, between theEoandNaviarivers (or more exactly Eo and Frexulfe rivers). It is calledeonaviegoorgallego-asturianoby its speakers.
The Fala language, known by its speakers asxalimés,mañegu,a fala de Xálimaandchapurráuand in Portuguese asa fala de Xálima,a fala da Estremadura,o galego da Estremadura,valegoorgalaico-estremenho, is another descendant of Galician–Portuguese, spoken by a small number of people in the Spanish towns ofValverde del Fresno(Valverdi du Fresnu),Eljas(As Ellas) andSan Martín de Trevejo(Sa Martín de Trevellu) in the autonomous community ofExtremadura, near the border with Portugal.
There are a number of other places in Spain in which the native language of the common people is a descendant of the Galician–Portuguese group, such asLa Alamedilla,Cedillo(Cedilho),Herrera de Alcántara(Ferreira d'Alcântara) andOlivenza(Olivença), but in these municipalities, what is spoken is actually Portuguese, not disputed as such in the mainstream.
The diversity of dialects of the Portuguese language is known since the time of medieval Portuguese-Galician language when it coexisted with the Lusitanian-Mozarabic dialect, spoken in the south of Portugal. The dialectal diversity becomes more evident in the work ofFernão d'Oliveira, in theGrammatica da Lingoagem Portuguesa, (1536), where he remarks that the people of Portuguese regions of Beira, Alentejo, Estremadura, and Entre Douro e Minho, all speak differently from each other. Also Contador d'Argote (1725) distinguishes three main varieties of dialects: the local dialects, the dialects of time, and of profession (work jargon). Of local dialects he highlights five main dialects: the dialect of Estremadura, of Entre-Douro e Minho, of Beira, of Algarve and of Trás-os-Montes. He also makes reference to the overseas dialects, the rustic dialects, the poetic dialect and that of prose.[citation needed]
In the kingdom of Portugal,Ladinho(orLingoagem Ladinha) was the name given to the pure Portuguese romance language, without any mixture of Aravia or Gerigonça Judenga.[115]While the termlíngua vulgarwas used to name the language before D. Dinis decided to call it "Portuguese language",[116]the erudite version used and known as Galician–Portuguese (the language of the Portuguese court) and all other Portuguese dialects were spoken at the same time. In a historical perspective the Portuguese language was never just one dialect. Just like today there is a standard Portuguese (actually two) among the several dialects of Portuguese, in the past there was Galician–Portuguese as the "standard", coexisting with other dialects.

## Influence on other languages
Portuguese has providedloanwordsto many languages, such asIndonesian,Manado Malay,Malayalam,Sri Lankan TamilandSinhala,Malay,Bengali,English,Hindi,Swahili,Afrikaans,Konkani,Marathi,Punjabi,Tetum,Xitsonga,Japanese,Lanc-Patuá,Esan,Bandari(spoken in Iran) andSranan Tongo(spoken in Suriname). It left a strong influence on thelíngua brasílica, aTupi–Guarani language, which was the most widely spoken in Brazil until the 18th century, and on the language spoken aroundSikkainFloresIsland,Indonesia. In nearbyLarantuka, Portuguese is used for prayers inHoly Weekrituals.
The Japanese–Portuguese dictionaryNippo Jisho(1603) was the first dictionary of Japanese in a European language, a product ofJesuitmissionary activity in Japan. Building on the work of earlier Portuguese missionaries, theDictionarium Anamiticum, Lusitanum et Latinum(Annamite–Portuguese–Latin dictionary) ofAlexandre de Rhodes(1651) introduced the modernorthography of Vietnamese, which is based on the orthography of 17th-century Portuguese. TheRomanizationofChinesewas also influenced by the Portuguese language (among others), particularly regardingChinese surnames; one example isMei. During 1583–88 Italian JesuitsMichele RuggieriandMatteo Riccicreated a Portuguese–Chinese dictionary – the first ever European–Chinese dictionary.[117][118]
For instance, asPortuguese merchantswere presumably the first to introduce thesweet orangein Europe, in several modernIndo-European languagesthe fruit has been named after them. Some examples are Albanianportokall, Bosnian (archaic)portokal,prtokal, Bulgarianпортокал(portokal), Greekπορτοκάλι(portokáli),Macedonianportokal, Persianپرتقال(porteghal), and Romanianportocală.[119][120]Related names can be found in other languages, such as Arabicالبرتقال(burtuqāl),Georgianფორთოხალი(p'ort'oxali), TurkishportakalandAmharicbirtukan.[119]Also, in southernItalian dialects(e.g.Neapolitan), an orange isportogalloorpurtuallo, literally "(the) Portuguese (one)", in contrast tostandard Italianarancia.

## Derived languages
Beginning in the 16th century, the extensive contacts between Portuguese travelers and settlers, African and Asian slaves, and local populations led to the appearance of manypidginswith varying amounts of Portuguese influence.
As each of these pidgins became the mother tongue of succeeding generations, they evolved into fully fledgedcreole languages, which remained in use in many parts of Asia, Africa and South America until the 18th century.
Some Portuguese-based or Portuguese-influenced creoles are still spoken today, namelyCape Verdean CreoleandPapiamento. Portuguese-based creoles are spoken by over three million people worldwide, especially people of partialPortugueseancestry.

## Phonology
Portuguese phonology is similar to those of languages such asFranco-ProvençalandCatalan, whereasthat of Spanishis similar to those ofSardinianand theSouthern Italian dialects. Some would describe the phonology of Portuguese as a blend ofSpanish,Gallo-Romance(e.g.French) and thelanguages of northern Italy(especiallyGenoese).[121][10]
Portuguese can have as many as nine oral vowels, as many as two semivowels, and as many as 21 consonants; some varieties of the language have fewerphonemes. There are also fivenasal vowels, which some linguists regard asallophonesof oral vowels.[citation needed]Galician–Portuguese developed in the region of the former Roman province ofGallaecia, from theVulgar Latin(common Latin) that had been introduced by Roman soldiers, colonists and magistrates during the time of theRoman Empire. Although the process may have been slower than in other regions, after a period of bilingualism, the centuries of contact with Vulgar Latin completely extinguished the native languages, and a variety of Latin with a few Gallaecian features evolved.[122][123]
GallaecianandLusitanianinfluences were absorbed into the local dialect of Vulgar Latin; this can be detected in some Galician–Portuguese words, as well as in placenames ofCelticandIberianorigin.[124][125]
An early form of Galician–Portuguese was already spoken in theKingdom of the Suebi, and by the year 800 Galician–Portuguese had already become thevernacularof northwestern Iberia.[126]The first knownphoneticchanges in Vulgar Latin, which began the evolution to Galician–Portuguese, took place during the rule of the Germanic groups, theSuebi(411–585) andVisigoths(585–711).[126]The Galician–Portuguese "inflected infinitive" (or "personal infinitive")[127][128]and thenasal vowelsmay have evolved under the influence of localCeltic(as inOld French).[12][129]The nasal vowels would thus be a phonologic characteristic of the Vulgar Latin spoken in RomanGallaecia, but they are not attested in writing until after the 6th and 7th centuries.[130]

## Vowels
LikeCatalanandGerman, Portuguese uses vowel quality to contrast stressed syllables with unstressed syllables. Unstressed isolated vowels tend to beraisedand sometimes centralized.

## Consonants
Phonetic notes

## Orthography
Portuguese orthographyis based on theLatin alphabetand makes use of theacute accent, thecircumflex accent, thegrave accent, thetilde, and thecedillato denote stress,vowel height, nasalization, and other sound changes. Thediaeresiswas abolished by the lastOrthography Agreement. Accented letters and digraphs are not counted as separate characters forcollationpurposes.
The spelling of Portuguese is largelyphonemic, but somephonemescan be spelled in more than one way. In ambiguous cases, the correct spelling is determined through a combination ofetymologywithmorphologyand tradition; so there is not a perfect one-to-one correspondence between sounds and letters or digraphs. Knowing the maininflectionalparadigms of Portuguese and being acquainted with the orthography of other Western European languages can be helpful.

## Grammar
A notable aspect of the grammar of Portuguese is the verb. Morphologically, more verbal inflections from classical Latin have been preserved by Portuguese than by any other majorRomance language. Portuguese and Spanish share very similar grammar, vocabulary and sentence structure. Portuguese also has some grammatical innovations not found in other Romance languages (except Galician and Fala):

## Vocabulary
Most of the lexicon of Portuguese is derived, directly or through other Romance languages, from Latin. Nevertheless, because of its originalLusitanianand CelticGallaecianheritage, and the later participation of Portugal in theAge of Discovery, it has a relevant number of words from the ancientHispano-Celtic group[11]and adoptedloanwordsfrom other languages around the world.
A number of Portuguese words can still be traced to thepre-Roman inhabitants of Portugal, which included theGallaeci,Lusitanians,CelticiandCynetes. Most of these words derived from the Hispano-CelticGallaecian languageof northwestern Iberia, and are very often shared withGaliciansince both languages have the same origin in the medieval language of Galician–Portuguese. A few of these words existed in Latin as loanwords from otherCelticsources, oftenGaulish. Altogether these are over 3,000 words, verbs, toponymic names of towns, rivers, surnames, tools, lexicon linked to rural life and natural world.[147]
In the 5th century, the Iberian Peninsula (the RomanHispania) was conquered by theGermanic,SuebiandVisigoths. As they adopted theRomancivilization and language, however, these people contributed with some 500Germanicwords to the lexicon. Many of these words are related to:
TheGermanic languagesinfluence also exists intoponymic surnamesandpatronymic surnamesborne by Visigoth sovereigns and their descendants, and it dwells on placenames such asErmesinde,EsposendeandResendewheresindeandsendeare derived from the Germanicsinths('military expedition') and in the case of Resende, the prefixrecomes from Germanicreths('council'). Other examples of Portuguese names, surnames and town names of Germanictoponymicorigin include Henrique,Henriques, Vermoim, Mandim, Calquim, Baguim, Gemunde, Guetim, Sermonde and many more, are quite common mainly in the oldSuebiand laterVisigothicdominated regions, covering today's Northern half of Portugal andGalicia.
Between the 9th and early 13th centuries, Portuguese acquired some 400 to 600 words fromArabicby influence ofMoorish Iberia. They are often recognizable by the initialArabic articlea(l)-, and include common words such asaldeia('village') from الضيعةaḍ-ḍayʿa,alface('lettuce') from الخسةal-khassa,armazém('warehouse') from المخزنal-makhzan, andazeite('olive oil') from الزيتaz-zayt.
Starting in the 15th century, the Portuguese maritime explorations led to the introduction of many loanwords from Asian languages. For instance,catana('cutlass') fromJapanesekatana,chá('tea') fromChinesechá, andcanja[149]('chicken-soup, piece of cake') fromMalayalam.
.
From the 16th to the 19th centuries, because of the role of Portugal as intermediary in theAtlantic slave trade, and the establishment of large Portuguese colonies in Angola, Mozambique, and Brazil, Portuguese acquired several words of African andAmerindorigin, especially names for most of the animals and plants found in those territories. While those terms are mostly used in the former colonies, many became current in European Portuguese as well. FromKimbundu, for example, camekifumate>cafuné('head caress') (Brazil),kusula>caçula('youngest child') (Brazil),marimbondo('tropical wasp') (Brazil), andkubungula>bungular('to dance like a wizard') (Angola). From South America camebatata('potato'), fromTaino;ananásandabacaxi, fromTupi–GuaraninanáandTupiibá cati, respectively (two species ofpineapple), andpipoca('popcorn') from Tupi andtucano('toucan') fromGuaranitucan.
Finally, it has received a steady influx of loanwords from other European languages, especially French andEnglish. These are by far the most important languages when referring to loanwords. There are many examples such as:colchete/crochê('bracket'/'crochet'),paletó('jacket'),batom('lipstick'), andfilé/filete('steak'/'slice'),rua('street'), respectively, from Frenchcrochet,paletot,bâton,filet,rue; andbife('steak'),futebol,revólver,stock/estoque,folclore, from English "beef", "football", "revolver", "stock", "folklore".
Examples from other European languages:macarrão('pasta'),piloto('pilot'),carroça('carriage'), andbarraca('barrack'), from Italianmaccherone,pilota,carrozza, andbaracca;melena('hair lock'),fiambre('wet-cured ham') (in Portugal, in contrast withpresunto'dry-cured ham' from Latinprae-exsuctus'dehydrated') or ('canned ham') (in Brazil, in contrast with non-canned, wet-cured (presunto cozido) and dry-cured (presunto cru)), orcastelhano('Castilian'), from Spanishmelena('mane'),fiambreandcastellano.

## Dialects, accents and varieties
Modern StandardEuropean Portuguese(português padrão[150]orportuguês continental) is based on the Portuguese spoken in the area including and surrounding the cities ofCoimbraandLisbon, in central Portugal. Standard European Portuguese is also the preferred standard by the Portuguese-speaking African countries. As such, and despite the fact that its speakers are dispersed around the world, Portuguese has only two dialects used for learning: the European and the Brazilian. Some aspects and sounds found in many dialects of Brazil are exclusive to South America, and cannot be found in Europe. The same occur with the Santomean, Mozambican, Bissau-Guinean, Angolan and Cape Verdean dialects, being exclusive to Africa. SeePortuguese in Africa.
Audio samples of some dialects and accents of Portuguese are available below. There are some differences between the areas but these are the best approximations possible. IPA transcriptions refer to the names in local pronunciation.

## Portugal
Audio samples of some dialects and accents of Portuguese are available below.[152]There are some differences between the areas but these are the best approximations possible. IPA transcriptions refer to the names in local pronunciation.

## Brazil
Você, a pronoun meaning "you", is used for educated, formal, and colloquial respectful speech in most Portuguese-speaking regions. In a few Brazilian states such asRio Grande do Sul, Pará, among others,vocêis virtually absent from the spoken language. Riograndense and European Portuguese normally distinguishes formal from informal speech by verbal conjugation. Informal speech employstufollowed by second person verbs, formal language retains the formalvocê, followed by the third person conjugation.
Conjugation of verbs intuhas three different forms in Brazil (verb "to see":tu viste?, in the traditional second person;tu viu?, in the third person; andtu visse?, in the innovative second person), the conjugation used in the Brazilian states of Pará, Santa Catarina and Maranhão being generally traditional second person, the kind that is used in other Portuguese-speaking countries and learned in Brazilian schools.
The predominance of Southeastern-based media products has establishedvocêas the pronoun of choice for the second person singular in both writing and multimedia communications. However, in the city of Rio de Janeiro, the country's main cultural center, the usage oftuhas been expanding ever since the end of the 20th century,[173]being most frequent among youngsters, and a number of studies have also shown an increase in its use in a number of other Brazilian dialects.[174][175]

## Other countries and dependencies
Differences between dialects are mostly ofaccentandvocabulary, but between the Brazilian dialects and other dialects, especially in their most colloquial forms, there can also be some grammatical differences. ThePortuguese-based creolesspoken in various parts of Africa, Asia, and the Americas are independent languages.

## Characterization and peculiarities
Portuguese, likeCatalan, preserves the stressed vowels ofVulgar Latinwhich became diphthongs in most other Romance languages; cf. Port., Cat., Sard.pedra; Fr.pierre, Sp.piedra, It.pietra, Ro.piatră, from Lat.petra("stone"); or Port.fogo, Cat.foc, Sard.fogu; Sp.fuego, It.fuoco, Fr.feu, Ro.foc, from Lat.focus("fire"). Another characteristic of early Portuguese was the loss ofintervocaliclandn, sometimes followed by the merger of the two surrounding vowels, or by the insertion of anepenthetic vowelbetween them: cf. Lat.salire("to exit"),tenere("to have"),catena("jail"), Port.sair,ter,cadeia.
When theelidedconsonant wasn, it oftennasalizedthe preceding vowel: cf. Lat.manum("hand"),ranam("frog"),bonum("good"), Old Portuguesemão,rãa,bõo(Portuguese:mão,rã,bom). This process was the source of most of the language's distinctive nasal diphthongs. In particular, the Latin endings-anem,-anumand-onembecame-ãoin most cases, cf. Lat.canis("dog"),germanus("brother"),ratio("reason") with Modern Port.cão,irmão,razão, and their plurals-anes,-anos,-onesnormally became-ães,-ãos,-ões, cf.cães,irmãos,razões. This also occurs in the minority SwissRomanshlanguage in many equivalent words such asmaun("hand"),bun("good"), orchaun("dog").[176]
The Portuguese language is the onlyRomance languagethat preserves the clitic casemesoclisis: cf.dar-te-ei(I'll give thee),amar-te-ei(I'll love you),contactá-los-ei(I'll contact them). LikeGalician, it also retains the Latin syntheticpluperfecttense:eu estivera(I had been),eu vivera(I had lived),vós vivêreis(you had lived).[177]Romanianalso has this tense, but uses the -s- form.

## Sample text
Article 1 of theUniversal Declaration of Human Rightsin Portuguese:[178]
Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in English:[179]
Phonetic transcription (Brazilian Portuguese):
Phonetic transcription (European Portuguese):