## Rugby union
Rugby union football, commonly known simply asrugby unionor often justrugby, is aclose-contactteam sportthat originated atRugby SchoolinEnglandin the first half of the 19th century. Rugby involves running with the ball in hand. In its most common form, the game is played between two teams of 15 players each, using anoval-shaped ballon a rectangular field called a pitch. The field has H-shapedgoalpostsat both ends. The objective of the game is to score more points than the opposing team by scoringtries, conversion kicks,penalties, anddrop goals.
Rugby union is a popular sport around the world, played by people regardless of gender, age or size.[3]In 2023, there were more than 10 million players worldwide, of whom 8.4 million were registered.World Rugby, previously called the International Rugby Football Board (IRFB) and the International Rugby Board (IRB), has been the governing body for rugby union since 1886, and currently has 116 countries as full members and 18 associate members.
In 1845, the first rules of the game were written by pupils at Rugby School; other significant events in the early development of rugby include the decision byBlackheath F.C.to leaveThe Football Associationin 1863 and, in 1895, thesplitbetween rugby union andrugby league. Historically rugby union was an amateur sport, but in 1995 formal restrictions on payments to players were removed, making the game open to professionals at the highest level for the first time.[4]
Rugby union spread from theHome Nationsof theUnited KingdomandIreland, with other early proponents of the sport includingAustralia,New Zealand,South AfricaandFrance. The sport is primarily followed in the United Kingdom, Ireland, France, New Zealand, Australia,Italy,Fiji,Tonga,Samoa,Georgia,Southern Africa,Argentina, and in more recent times,Japan,Korea,South America,the United StatesandCanada,[5][6][7]its growth occurring during the expansion of theBritish Empireand through French proponents (Rugby Europe) in Europe. Countries that have adopted rugby union as theirde factonational sportincludeFiji,Georgia,Madagascar,[8]New Zealand,Samoa,Tonga, andWales.
International matches have taken place since 1871 when the first game was played between Scotland and England atRaeburn PlaceinEdinburgh. TheRugby World Cup, first held in 1987, is held every four years. TheSix Nations Championshipin Europe andThe Rugby Championshipin the Southern Hemisphere are other important international competitions that are held annually.
TheWomen's Rugby World Cup, first held in 1991, and theUnited Stateswon their inaugural title. There is also theWomen's Six Nations Championshipwhich is held annually alongside the men's counterpart.
National club and provincial competitions include thePremiershipin England, theTop 14in France, theBunnings NPCin New Zealand, theLeague Onein Japan and theCurrie Cupin South Africa. Other transnational club competitions include theUnited Rugby Championshipof club teams from Ireland, Italy, Scotland, South Africa and Wales,European Rugby Champions Cupin Europe, andSuper Rugbyin Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific Islands.

## History
Primitive forms of football includedharpastum, played by the Romans, where two opposing teams competed to throw a large ball into an opposition net, fighting for possession of the ball. Medieval Irishmen playedcaid, carrying an inflated bladder and using arched trees as goals. The Welsh played an inter-parish game using a wooden ball calledcnapan. Frenchmen playedla souleand Georgians playedlelo burti. "Football" as a game was well established by 1803 atRugby Schooland by the 1830s, "running in" with the ball in hand was allowed but subject to hacking and "collaring".[9]
Former Rugby School studentAlbert Pellis credited with having formed the first "football" team while a student atCambridge University.[10]Major private schools each used different rules during this early period, with former pupils from Rugby andEtonattempting to carry their preferred rules through to their universities.[11]A significant event in the early development of rugby football was the production of a written set of rules at Rugby School in 1845,[12][13]followed by theCambridge Rulesthat were drawn up in 1848.[14]
Formed in 1863, the national governing bodyThe Football Association(FA) began codifying a set of universal football rules. These new rules specifically banned players from running with the ball in hand and also disallowedhacking(kicking players in the shins), both of which were legal and common tactics under the Rugby School's rules of the sport. In protest at the imposition of the new rules, theBlackheath Clubleft the FA[15][16]followed by several other clubs that also favoured the "Rugby Rules". Although these clubs decided to ban hacking soon afterwards, the split was permanent, andthe FA's codified rulesbecame known as "association football" whilst the clubs that had favoured the Rugby Rules formed theRugby Football Unionin 1871,[15]and their code became known as "rugby football".
In 1895, there wasa major schism within rugby footballin England in which numerous clubs from Northern England resigned from the RFU over the issue of reimbursing players for time lost from their workplaces. The split highlighted the social and class divisions in the sport in England. Although the rules of the game were not a factor in the split, the breakaway teams subsequently adopted some rule changes and this became the separate code of "rugby league". The RFU's code thereafter took on the name "rugby union" to differentiate it from rugby league,[17]but both versions of the sport are known simply as "rugby" throughout most of the world.[18]

## First internationals
Thefirst rugby football internationalwas played on 27 March 1871 betweenScotlandandEnglandinEdinburgh. Scotland won the game by one goal and one try to one goal.[15][19]By 1881 bothIrelandandWaleshad representative teams and in 1883 the first international competition, theHome Nations Championshiphad begun. 1883 is also the year of the firstrugby sevenstournament, theMelrose Sevens,[20]which is still held annually.
Two important overseas tours took place in 1888: aBritish Islesteam visited Australia and New Zealand—although a private venture, it laid the foundations for futureBritish and Irish Lionstours;[21]and the1888–89 New Zealand Native football teambrought the first overseas team to British spectators.[22]
During the early history of rugby union, a time before commercial air travel, teams from different continents rarely met. The first two notable tours both took place in 1888—the British Isles team touring New Zealand and Australia,[23]followed by the New Zealand team touring Europe.[24]Traditionally the most prestigious tours were the Southern Hemisphere countries of Australia, New Zealand and South Africa making a tour of a Northern Hemisphere, and the return tours made by a joint British and Irish team.[25]Tours would last for months, due to long traveling times and the number of games undertaken; the 1888 New Zealand team began their tour in Hawkes Bay in June and did not complete their schedule until August 1889, having played 107 rugby matches.[26]Touring international sides would play test matches against international opponents, including national, club and county sides in the case of Northern Hemisphere rugby, or provincial/state sides in the case of Southern Hemisphere rugby.[23][27]
Between 1905 and 1908, all three major Southern Hemisphere rugby countries sent their first touring teams to the Northern Hemisphere:New Zealandin 1905, followed bySouth Africain 1906 andAustraliain 1908. All three teams brought new styles of play, fitness levels and tactics,[28]and were far more successful than critics had expected.[29]
The New Zealand 1905 touring team performed ahakabefore each match, leading Welsh Rugby Union administratorTom Williamsto suggest that Wales playerTeddy Morganlead the crowd in singing the Welsh national anthem,Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau, as a response. After Morgan began singing, the crowd joined in: the first time a national anthem was sung at the start of a sporting event.[30][nb 2]In 1905 France played England in its first international match.[28]
Rugby union was included as an event in the Olympic Games four times during the early 20th century. No international rugby games and union-sponsored club matches were played during the First World War, but competitions continued through service teams such as theNew Zealand Army team.[32]During the Second World War no international matches were played by most countries, though Italy, Germany and Romania played a limited number of games,[33][34][35]andCambridgeandOxfordcontinued their annualUniversity Match.[36]
The first officially sanctioned international rugby sevens tournament took place in 1973 at Murrayfield, one of Scotland's biggest stadiums, as part of theScottish Rugby Unioncentenary celebrations.[37]

## World Cup and professionalism
In 1987, the first Rugby World Cup was held in Australia and New Zealand, and the inaugural winners were New Zealand. The first World Cup Sevens tournament was held at Murrayfield in 1993. Rugby Sevens was introduced into theCommonwealth Gamesin 1998 and was added to the Olympic Games of 2016.[38]Both men and women's Sevens took place at the 2020 Olympic Games in Tokyo.[39]
Rugby union was an amateur sport until the IRB declared the game "open" in August 1995 (shortly after the completion of the 1995 World Cup), removing restrictions on payments to players.[40][41]However, the pre-1995 period of rugby union was marked by frequent accusations of "shamateurism",[42]including an investigation in Britain by a House of Commons Select committee in early 1995.[43][44]Following the introduction of professionalism trans-national club competitions were started, with theHeineken Cupin the Northern Hemisphere andSuper Rugbyin the Southern Hemisphere.[45][46]
TheTri Nations, an annual international tournament involving Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, kicked off in 1996.[46]In2012, this competition was extended to includeArgentina, a country whose impressive performances in international games (especially finishing in third place in the 2007 Rugby World Cup) was deemed to merit inclusion in the competition. As a result of the expansion to four teams, the tournament was renamed The Rugby Championship.[47]

## Teams and positions
Each team starts the match with 15 players on the field and typically seven or eight substitutes but this varies at amateur level.[48]The 15 players on the field are divided into eightforwards(two more than inrugby league) and sevenbacks.[49]There are typically significantly more forwards on the bench than backs with, for example, South Africa having a 7–1 split in favour of forwards in their August 2023 match against New Zealand in Twickenham. A 6-2 or 5–3 split is more common.

## Forwards
The main responsibilities of the forward players are to gain and retain possession of the ball. Forwards play a vital role in tackling and rucking opposing players.[50]Players in these positions are generally bigger and stronger and take part in thescrumand line-out.[50]The forwards are often collectively referred to as the 'pack', especially when in the scrum formation.[51]

## Front row
The front row consists of three players: twoprops(the loosehead prop and the tighthead prop) and thehooker. The role of the two props is to support the hooker during scrums, to provide support for the jumpers during line-outs and to provide strength and power in rucks and mauls. The third position in the front row is the hooker. The hooker is a key position in attacking and defensive play and is responsible for winning the ball in the scrum. Hookers normally throw the ball in at line-outs.[49][52]

## Second row
The second row consists of twolocksor lock forwards. Locks are usually the tallest players in the team and specialise as line-out jumpers.[49]The main role of the lock in line-outs is to make a standing jump, often supported by the other forwards, to either collect the thrown ball or ensure the ball comes down on their side. Locks also have an important role in the scrum, binding directly behind the three front row players and providing forward drive.[49]

## Back row
The back row, not to be confused with 'Backs', is the third and final row of the forward positions, who are often referred to as the loose forwards.[51]The three positions in the back row are the twoflankersand thenumber 8. The two flanker positions, known as the blindside flanker and openside flanker, are the final row in the scrum. They are usually the most mobile forwards in the game. Their main role is to win possession through 'turn overs'.[49]The number 8 packs down between the two locks at the back of the scrum. The role of the number 8 in the scrum is to control the ball after it has been heeled back from the front of the pack, and the position provides a link between the forwards and backs during attacking phases.[53]

## Backs
The role of the backs is to create and convert point-scoring opportunities. They are generally smaller, faster and more agile than the forwards.[50]Another distinction between the backs and the forwards is that the backs are expected to have superior kicking and ball-handling skills, especially the fly-half, scrum-half, and full-back.[50]

## Half-backs
The half-backs consist of two positions, thescrum-halfand thefly-half, also known in the Southern Hemisphere as half-back and first five-eighth respectively. The fly-half is crucial to a team's game plan, orchestrating the team's performance.[53]They are usually the first to receive the ball from the scrum-half following a breakdown, lineout, or scrum, and need to be decisive with what actions to take and be effective at communicating with the outside backs.[53]Many fly-halves are also their team's goal kickers. The scrum-half is the link between the forwards and the backs.[53]They receive the ball from the lineout and remove the ball from the back of the scrum, usually passing it to the fly-half.[54]They also feed the scrum and sometimes have to act as a fourth loose forward.[55]

## Three-quarters
There are four three quarter positions: twocentres(inside and outside) and twowings(left and right). In the Southern Hemisphere, the inside centre is commonly referred to as the second five-eighth, while the outside centre is simply known as the centre. The centres will attempt to tackle attacking players; whilst in attack, they should employ speed and strength to breach opposition defences.[53]The wings are generally positioned on the outside of the backline. Their primary function is to finish off moves and score tries.[56]Wings are usually the fastest players in the team and are elusive runners who use their speed to avoid tackles.[57]

## Full-back
Thefull-backis normally positioned several metres behind the back line. They often field opposition kicks and are usually the last line of defence should an opponent break through the back line.[53]Two of the most important attributes of a good full-back are dependable catching skills and a good kicking game.[58]

## Scoring
Rugby union is played between two teams – the one that scores more points wins the game. Points can be scored in several ways: atry, scored by grounding the ball in the in-goal area (between the goal line and the dead-ball line), is worth 5 points and a subsequent conversion kick scores 2 points; a successfulpenalty kickor adrop goaleach score 3 points.[59]The values of each of these scoring methods have been changed over the years.[60]

## Playing field
According to World Rugby's Laws of the Game,[61]a typical rugby ground, formally known as the "playing enclosure", is formed by two major zones:
The referee (and their assistants) generally have full authority and responsibility for all players and other officials inside the playing enclosure. Fences or ropes (particularly at amateur clubs) are generally used to mark the extent of this area, although in modern stadia this may include the entire arena floor or other designated space.
The Laws, above all, require that the playing enclosure's surface be safe, whilst also permitting grass, sand, clay, snow or conforming artificial turf to be used; the surface would generally be uniform across both the playing area and perimeter area, although depending on how large the perimeter is, other surfaces such as dirt, artificial turf, etc. may be used outside of a "sliding" perimeter from the bounds of the playing area.

## Playing area
For the most part, the "playing area" is where the majority of play occurs. The ball is generally considered live whilst in this area, so long as players do not infringe, with special rules applied to specific zones of the playing area.
The playing area consists of:

## Field of play
A typical "field of play" is generally 100 metres long by 68–70 metres wide for senior rugby, depending on the specific requirements of each ground. The Laws require the field of play to be between 94 and 100 metres (103 and 109 yards) long, with a width of between 68 and 70 metres (74 and 77 yards).
As other football codes, such as association football and rugby league, have specified a preferred or standard 68 metre width, this is often used unless a ground has been specifically designed to accommodate a 70-metre rugby field. 100 metres is the typical length, with a line (see below) often marked at halfway with "50" on it, representing 50 metres from each goal line. The variations have been allowed in the Laws, possibly to accommodate older grounds (perhaps even pre-metrification when yards and feet were specified) and developing nations.

## Other lines and markings
The field of play is divided by a solid "halfway" line, drawn perpendicular to the sidelines at their midpoint. A 0.5m line is marked perpendicular to the halfway lines at its midpoint, designating the spot where the kickoffs shall be taken. The areas between each goal line and the halfway line are known as "halves" as in other football codes.
A pair of solid lines are also drawn perpendicular to the sidelines, 22 metres (formerly 25 yards) from each end of the field of play and called the 22-metre lines, or "22"s. An area at each end, also known as the "22", is bounded by, but does not include, the sidelines, goal line and 22-metre line. In this area, a defensive player who cleanly catches a ball kicked by the other team, without the ball having already touched the ground after the kick, is entitled to claim a free kick, or "mark". Additionally, if the ball is kicked into touch by a player who had at least one foot on or behind their own 22-metre line, the line-out formed at the spot where the ball crossed the touch-line instead of being taken in line with the spot from where it was kicked.[62]
Additional broken or dashed lines (of 5 metre dash lengths, according to the Laws[63]) are drawn in each half or on each side of, the field, each with specific purposes under the Laws:
Generally, points where the dashed lines intersect other lines will be marked with a "T" or cross shape, although the extensions of dashed lines are generally not drawn within 5 metres of the goal lines or sidelines, to allow a clear demarcation of the field of play's boundaries.
The Laws require the playing area to be rectangular in shape, however variations may be permitted with the approval of relevant unions. A notable example is Chatswood Oval in Sydney, Australia, an elliptically shaped cricket ground which is the home of Gordon rugby club, that has curved dead-ball lines to maximise the available in-goal space.
Where multiple sports share a field (e.g. a rugby league and a rugby union club sharing one field), lines may be overlaid on top of each other, sometimes in different colours. However, particularly for television, rugby union line markings are generally painted white. Some exceptions include the Wallabies (Australia's national team) who often have yellow markings. Local clubs may use black, yellow, or other colours on grass, with other surfaces possibly requiring different marking techniques.
Unlike association football, where on-field advertising is strictly forbidden in the laws,[64]World Rugby allows sponsors logos to be painted on the playing surface. This is another way in which clubs can make money in the professional era and is also often used by host nations, professional leagues and tournaments as additional revenue streams, particularly when games are broadcast. In recent years, augmented reality technology has been used to replace painting to protect the surface or save costs on painting fields, producing a similar effect for broadcast albeit sometimes with poorer results.[65]

## In-goal areas
The in-goal areas sit behind the goal lines, equivalent to American football's "end zones". The in-goal areas must be between 6 and 22 metres (6.6 and 24.1 yards) deep and cover the full width of the field. A ball grounded in this area by an attacking player will generally result in a try being awarded, unless there has been a previous infringement, or the player has gone out-of-bounds whilst in possession of the ball.

## Perimeter area
The perimeter area is considered "out-of-bounds" for the ball and the players, normally resulting in the non-infringing team receiving possession of the ball at a restart. The perimeter area can be divided into two areas:
For the purposes of determining if a ball is "out-of-bounds" (i.e. has left the playing area), the perimeter area extends indefinitely away from the playing area.
When a ball or player goes into touch, a lineout throw is generally awarded to the opposition at the spot on the sideline where they left the field. Exceptions include a kick out "on the full" (i.e. the ball did not land in the field-of-play before going into touch) in which case the lineout would still take place on the sideline but back in line with where the ball was kicked, or when a team takes a free kick from apenaltywhere they would retain the right to throw-in.
The perimeter area should be clear and free of obstructions and heavy, solid objects which could pose a danger to players for at least 5 metres from the playing area, according to the Laws. Players often leave the playing area whether accidentally or due to being forced off of the field, sometimes sliding or needing to slow down from a sprint. Many venues at elite levels leave larger spaces around the field to accommodate fitter and faster (or heavier) players. Fixed cameras on tripods and advertising hoardings are often the main culprits for injuring players in the perimeter area.

## Flag posts
Also required in the perimeter area are a set of 14 flag posts, each with a minimum height of 1.2 metres, marking the intersections of certain lines or other nominated distances. These are generally a plastic pole on a spring loaded or otherwise soft base, sometimes with a flag on top, covered in foam padding. Others may be moulded plastic or disposable cardboard. At lower levels, these flags may not be used, but are still specified in the Laws. Flags are placed as follows:

## Goalposts
Rugby goalposts are H-shaped and are situated in the middle of the goal lines at each end of the field. They consist of two vertical poles (known as "uprights"), generally made of steel or other metal but sometimes wood or a plastic, 5.6 metres (6.1 yd) apart, connected by a horizontal "crossbar" 3 metres (3.3 yd) above the ground. The minimum height for posts' uprights is 3.4 metres (3.7 yd),[66]with taller posts generally seen. The bottom parts of each upright are generally wrapped in purpose-made padding to protect players from injury when coming into contact with the posts and creating another opportunity for sponsors. Until a Law change by World Rugby in 2020, it was possible for an attacking player to score a try by grounding the ball against the base of the upright as the padding was considered an extension of the goal line.[67]

## Match structure
At the beginning of the game, the captains and the referee toss a coin to decide which team will kick off first. Play then starts with a dropkick, with the players chasing the ball into the opposition's territory, and the other side trying to retrieve the ball and advance it. The dropkick must make contact with the ground before being kicked. If the ball does not reach the opponent's 10-metre (11-yard) line 10 meters away, the opposing team has two choices: to have the ball kicked off again, or to have ascrumat the centre of the half-way line.[68]If the player with the ball is tackled, frequently aruckwill result.[69]
Games are divided into 40-minute halves, with anintermissionof not more than 15 minutes in the middle.[70]The sides exchange ends of the field after the half-time break.[70]Stoppages for injury or to allow the referee to take disciplinary action do not count as part of the playing time, so that the elapsed time is usually longer than 80 minutes.[70]The referee is responsible for keeping time, even when—as in many professional tournaments—he is assisted by an official time-keeper.[70]If time expires while the ball is in play, the game continues until the ball is "dead", and only then will the referee blow the whistle to signal half-time or full-time; but if the referee awards a penalty or free-kick, the game continues.[70]
In the knockout stages of rugby competitions, most notably theRugby World Cup, two extra time periods of 10 minutes periods are played (with an interval of 5 minutes in between) if the game is tied after full-time. If scores are level after 100 minutes then the rules call for 20 minutes of sudden-death extra time to be played. If the sudden-death extra time period results in no scoring a kicking competition is used to determine the winner. However, no match in the history of the Rugby World Cup has ever gone past 100 minutes into a sudden-death extra time period.[71]

## Passing and kicking
Forward passing (throwing the ball ahead to another player) is not allowed; the ball can be passed laterally or backwards.[72]The ball tends to be moved forward in three ways—by kicking, by a player running with it or within a scrum ormaul. Only the player with the ball may be tackled or rucked. A "knock-on" is committed when a player knocks the ball forward, and play is restarted with a scrum.[72]
Any player may kick the ball forward in an attempt to gain territory. When a player anywhere in the playing area kicks indirectly intotouchso that the ball first bounces in the field of play, the throw-in is taken where the ball went into touch.[73]If the player kicks directly into touch (i.e. without bouncing in-field first) from within one's own 22-metre (24-yard) line, the lineout is taken by the opposition where the ball went into touch, but if the ball is kicked into touch directly by a player outside the 22-metre (24-yard) line, the lineout is taken level to where the kick was taken.[73]

## Breakdowns
The aim of the defending side is to stop the player with the ball, by tackling them, and either bringing them to ground (which is frequently followed by a ruck) or contesting for possession with the ball-carrier on their feet (a maul). A ruck or maul is called a breakdown, and each is governed by a specific law.
Tackling
A player may tackle an opposing player who has the ball by holding them while bringing them to ground. Tacklers cannot tackle above the shoulder (the neck and head are out of bounds),[74]and the tackler has to attempt to wrap their arms around the player being tackled to complete the tackle. It is illegal to push, shoulder-charge, or to trip a player using feet or legs, but hands may be used (this being referred to as a tap-tackle orankle-tap).[75][76]Tacklers may not tackle an opponent who has jumped to catch a ball until the player has landed.[74]
Rucking and Mauling
Mauls occur after a player with the ball has come into contact with an opponent but the handler remains on his feet; once any combination of at least three players have bound themselves a maul has been set.[51]A ruck is similar to the maul, but in this case the ball has gone to ground with at least three attacking players binding themselves on the ground in an attempt to secure the ball.[51]

## Lineout
When the ball leaves the side of the field, aline-outis awarded against the team which last touched the ball.[77]Forward players from each team line up a metre apart, perpendicular to the touchline and between 5 and 15 m (5.5 and 16.4 yd) from the touchline.[77]The ball is thrown from the touchline down the centre of the lines of forwards by a player (usually thehooker) from the team that did not play the ball into touch.[77]The exception to this is when the ball went out from a penalty, in which case the side who gained the penalty throws the ball in.[77]
Both sides compete for the ball and players may lift their teammates.[78]A jumping player cannot be tackled until they stand and only shoulder-to-shoulder contact is allowed; deliberate infringement of this law is dangerous play, and results in a penalty kick.[79]

## Scrum
A scrum is a way of restarting the game safely and fairly after a minor infringement.[80]It is awarded when the ball has been knocked or passed forward, if a player takes the ball over their own try line and puts the ball down, when a player is accidentallyoffsideor when the ball is trapped in a ruck or maul with no realistic chance of being retrieved. A team may also opt for a scrum if awarded a penalty.[80]
A scrum is formed by the eight forwards from each team crouching down and binding together in three rows, before interlocking with the opposing team.[80]For each team, the front row consists of two props (loosehead and tighthead) either side of the hooker.[80]The two props are typically amongst the strongest players on the team. The second row consists of two locks and the two flankers. Behind the second row is the number 8. This formation is known as the 3–4–1 formation.[81]Once a scrum is formed the scrum-half from the team awarded thefeedrolls the ball into the gap between the two front-rows known as thetunnel.[80]The two hookers then compete for possession by hooking the ball backwards with their feet, while each pack tries to push the opposing pack backwards to help gain possession.[80]The side that wins possession can either keep the ball under their feet while driving the opposition back, in order to gain ground, or transfer the ball to the back of the scrum where it can be picked up by the number 8 or by the scrum-half.[80]

## Officials and offences
There are three match officials: a referee, and two assistant referees. The referees are commonly addressed as "Sir".[82]The latter, formerly known as touch judges, had the primary function of indicating when the ball had gone into "touch"; their role has been expanded and they are now expected to assist the referee in a number of areas, such as watching for foul play and checking offside lines.[82]In addition, for matches in high level competitions, there is often atelevision match official(TMO; popularly called the "video referee"), to assist with certain decisions, linked up to the referee by radio.[83]The referees have a system of hand signals to indicate their decision.[84]
Common offences include tackling above the shoulders, collapsing ascrum, ruck or maul, not releasing the ball when on the ground, or being offside.[85]The non-offending team has a number of options when awarded a penalty: a "tap" kick, when the ball is kicked a very short distance from hand, allowing the kicker to regather the ball and run with it; a punt, when the ball is kicked a long distance from hand, for field position; a place-kick, when the kicker will attempt to score a goal; or a scrum.[85]Players may be sent off (signalled by ared card) or temporarily suspended ("sin-binned") for ten minutes (yellow card) for foul play or repeated infringements, and may not be replaced.[85]
Occasionally, infringements are not caught by the referee during the match and these may be "cited" by theciting commissionerafter the match and have punishments (usually suspension for a number of weeks) imposed on the infringing player.[86]

## Replacements and substitutions
During the match, players may be replaced (for injury) or substituted (for tactical reasons).[48]A player who has been replaced may not rejoin play unless he was temporarily replaced to have bleeding controlled; a player who has been substituted may return temporarily, to replace a player who has a blood injury or has suffered a concussion, or permanently, if he is replacing a front-row forward.[48]In international matches, eight replacements are allowed; in domestic or cross-border tournaments, at the discretion of the responsible national union(s), the number of replacements may be nominated to a maximum of eight, of whom three must be sufficiently trained and experienced to provide cover for the three front row positions.[48][87]
Prior to 2016, all substitutions, no matter the cause, counted against the limit during a match. In 2016,World Rugbychanged the law so that substitutions made to replace a player deemed unable to continue due to foul play by the opposition would no longer count against the match limit. This change was introduced in January of that year in the Southern Hemisphere and June in the Northern Hemisphere.[88]

## Equipment
The most basic items of equipment for a game of rugby union are the ball itself, arugby shirt(also known as a "jersey"),rugby shorts, socks, andboots. Therugby ballis oval in shape (technically aprolate spheroid), and is made up of four panels.[89]The ball was historically made of leather, but in the modern era most games use a ball made from a synthetic material. World Rugby lays out specific dimensions for the ball, 280–300 mm (11–12 in) in length, 740–770 mm (29–30 in) in circumference of length and 580–620 mm (23–24 in) in circumference of width.[89]Rugby boots have soles with studs to allow grip on the turf of the pitch. The studs may be either metal or plastic but must not have any sharp edges or ridges.[90]
Protective equipment is optional and strictly regulated. The most common items aremouthguards, which are worn by almost all players, and are compulsory in some rugby-playing nations.[91]Other protective items that are permitted includeheadgear; thin (not more than 10 mm thick), non-rigid shoulder pads andshin guards, which are worn underneath socks.[90]Bandages or tape can be worn to support or protect injuries; some players wear tape around the head to protect the ears in scrums and rucks. Female players may also wear chest pads.[90]Although not worn for protection, some types of fingerless mitts are allowed to aid grip.[90]
It is the responsibility of the match officials to check players' clothing and equipment before a game to ensure that it conforms to the laws of the game.[90]

## Governing bodies
The international governing body of rugby union (and associated games such as sevens) is World Rugby.[92]The World Rugby headquarters are inDublin, Ireland.[92]World Rugby, founded in 1886, governs the sport worldwide and publishes the game's laws andrankings.[92]As of February 2014, World Rugby (then known as the IRB, for International Rugby Board) recorded 119 unions in its membership, 101 full members and 18 associate member countries.[2]According to World Rugby, rugby union is played by men and women in over 100 countries.[92]World Rugby controls theRugby World Cup,[92]theWomen's Rugby World Cup,[93]Rugby World Cup Sevens,[94]HSBC Sevens Series,[95]HSBC Women's Sevens Series,[96]World Under 20 Championship,[97]World Under 20 Trophy,[98]Nations Cup[99]and thePacific Nations Cup.[100]World Rugby holds votes to decide where each of these events are to be held, except in the case of the Sevens World Series for men and women, for which World Rugby contracts with several national unions to hold individual events.
Six regional associations, which are members of World Rugby, form the next level of administration; these are:
SANZAAR(South Africa, New Zealand, Australia and Argentina Rugby) is a joint venture of theSouth African Rugby Union,New Zealand Rugby,Rugby Australiaand theArgentine Rugby Union(UAR) that operatesSuper RugbyandThe Rugby Championship(formerly the Tri Nations before the entry of Argentina).[107]Although UAR initially had no representation on the former SANZAR board, it was granted input into the organisation's issues, especially with regard to The Rugby Championship,[108]and became a full SANZAAR member in 2016 (when the country entered Super Rugby).
National unions oversee rugby union within individual countries and are affiliated to World Rugby. Since 2016, the World Rugby Council has 40 seats. A total of 11 unions—the eight foundation unions ofEngland,Scotland,Ireland,Wales, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa andFrance, plus Argentina,CanadaandItaly—have two seats each. In addition, the six regional associations have two seats each. Four more unions—Georgia,Japan,Romaniaand theUSA—have one seat each. Finally, the chairman and vice chairman, who usually come from one of the eight foundation unions (although the current vice chairman,Agustín Pichot, is with the non-foundation Argentine union) have one vote each.[109][92]

## Global reach
The earliest countries to adopt rugby union wereEngland, the country of inception, and the other three Home Nations,Scotland,IrelandandWales. The spread of rugby union as a global sport has its roots in the exporting of the game by British expatriates, military personnel, and overseas university students. The first rugby club inFrancewas formed by British residents in Le Havre in 1872, while the next yearArgentinarecorded its first game: 'Banks' v 'City' in Buenos Aires.[110]In turn, French and Argentine travellers, particularly students, spread the Game beyond the British Empire, forming roots in particular in Italy, Romania, Uruguay and Chile.
Eight countries have adopted rugby union as their de factonational sport; they areFiji,[111]Georgia,Madagascar,[112][113][114]New Zealand,[115]Samoa,[116]Tonga,[117]Wales and South Africa.[118]

## Oceania
A rugby club was formed in Sydney,New South Wales,Australiain 1864; while the sport was said to have been introduced toNew ZealandbyCharles Monroin 1870, who played rugby while a student atChrist's College, Finchley.[15]
Several island nations have embraced the sport of rugby. Rugby was first played inFijic.1884by European and Fijian soldiers of the Native Constabulary atBaon Viti Levu island.[119][120]Fiji then sent their first overseas team toSamoain 1924, who in turn set up their ownunionin 1924.[121]Along withTonga, other countries to have national rugby teams in Oceania includethe Cook Islands,Niue,Papua New GuineaandSolomon Islands.[122]

## North America and Caribbean
In North America, a club formed in Montreal in 1868,Canada's first club. The city of Montreal also played its part in the introduction of the sport in theUnited States, when students ofMcGill Universityplayed against a team fromHarvard Universityin 1874.[15][110]The two variants of gridiron football —Canadian footballand, to a lesser extent,American football— were once considered forms ofrugby football, but the introduction of the legalforward passsevered the conceptual link between the old world rugby codes and new world gridiron codes, and they are seldom now referred to as forms of rugby football. One lasting element of the link, the governing body of Canadian football,Football Canada, was known as the Canadian Rugby Union (CRU) as late as 1967, more than fifty years after the sport parted ways with the established rules of rugby union. TheGrey Cup, the trophy awarded to the victorious team playing in the namesake championship of the professionalCanadian Football League(CFL), was originally awarded to the champion of the CRU. The two strongest leagues in the CRU, theInterprovincial Rugby Football UnioninEastern Canadaand theWestern Interprovincial Football UnioninWestern Canada, evolved into the present day CFL.
Although the exact date of arrival ofrugby union in Trinidad and Tobagois unknown, their first club Northern RFC was formed in 1923, a national team was playing by 1927 and due to a cancelled tour toBritish Guianain 1933, switched their venue toBarbados; introducing rugby to the island.[123][124]Other Atlantic countries to play rugby union includeJamaica[125]andBermuda.[126]
Rugby unionis the fastest growingcollege sportand sport in general in the US.[5][6][7]
Major League Rugbyis the top professional rugby union competition in the US and Canada. One American professional team,American Raptors, formerly the MLR Glendale and Colorado Raptors, plays in the broadly South AmericanSuper Rugby Americascompetition.

## Europe
The growth of rugby union inEuropeoutside the 6 Nations countries in terms of playing numbers,attendances, and viewership has been sporadic. Historically, British and Irish home teams played the Southern Hemisphere teams of Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, as well as France. The rest of Europe were left to play amongst themselves. During a period when it had been isolated by the British and Irish Unions, France, lacking international competition, became the only European team from the top tier to regularly play the other European countries; mainlyBelgium, theNetherlands,Germany,Spain,Romania,Poland,ItalyandCzechoslovakia.[104][127]In 1934, instigated by theFrench Rugby Federation, FIRA (Fédération Internationale de Rugby Amateur) was formed to organise rugby union outside the authority of the IRFB.[104]The founding members wereItaly,Romania,Netherlands,Portugal,Czechoslovakia, andSweden.
Four of these teams have had, at different times, notable success; the most successful,Italy, joined theFive Nations Championshipin 2000 as its sixth member, it has recorded numerous wins over all its 6N rivals with the exception of England, as well as defeating South Africa, Australia and Argentina in official matches. Before Italy's ascension, Romania enjoyed a period of success as their teams, backed by a supportive Communist government, regularly challenged the major European nations. The fall of Communism in Romania led to an era of steep decline from which Romania has yet to fully emerge, but it remains one of the most prominent of the second level European teams. Georgia, in the Caucasus, rose to prominence in the early 21st century; the traditional national gamelelobore strong similarities to rugby union, meaning the country was naturally attracted to the sport upon independence, and the Georgians are now regarded as the top European nation below the traditional Six Nations, and even possibly on a par with Italy. Having qualified for the2023 Rugby World Cupthrough the final repechage,Portugalhad a startlingly successful tournament, holding Georgia to an 18–18 draw, and performing strongly against Tier One sides Wales and Australia before an historic victory over eventual quarter-finalistsFiji. Portugal demonstrated significant fan support during the tournament.
Other European rugby playing nations of note includeRussia, whose first officially recorded match is marked by an encounter betweenDynamo Moscowand theMoscow Institute of Physical Educationin 1933.[128]Rugby union in Spain, often associated with the Basque and Catalan regions near the French border, is also relatively strong in this context, having twice missed out on World Cup qualification by rule breaches having gained the points required, and hosting several large crowds forEuropean Professional Rugby Cupmatches.
In 1999, FIRA agreed to place itself under the auspices of the IRB, transforming itself into a strictly European organising body. Accordingly, it changed its name to FIRA–AER (Fédération Internationale de Rugby Amateur – Association Européenne de Rugby). It adopted its current name ofRugby Europein 2014.

## South America
AlthoughArgentinais the best-known rugby playing nation inSouth America, founding theArgentine Rugby Unionin 1899,[129]several other countries on the continent have a long history. Rugby had been played inBrazilsince the end of the 19th century, but the game was played regularly only from 1926, when São Paulo beat Santos in an inter-city match.[130]It tookUruguayseveral aborted attempts to adapt to rugby, led mainly by the efforts of theMontevideo Cricket Club; these efforts succeeded in 1951 with the formation of a national league and four clubs.[131]Other South American countries that formed a rugby union includeChile(1948),[132]andParaguay(1968).[133]
Super Rugby Americasis the professional Rugby union competition inSouth America.

## Asia
Many Asian countries have a tradition of playing rugby dating from the British Empire.Indiabegan playing rugby in the early 1870s, theCalcutta Football Clubforming in 1873. However, with the departure of a local British army regiment, interest in rugby diminished in the area.[134]In 1878, The Calcutta Football Club was disbanded, and rugby in India faltered.[135]Sri Lankaclaims to have founded their union in 1878, and although little official information from the period is available, the team won the All-India cup in Madras in 1920.[136]The first recorded match inMalaysiawas in 1892, but the first confirmation of rugby is the existence of the HMS Malaya Cup which was first presented in 1922 and is still awarded to the winners of the Malay sevens.[137]
Rugby union was introduced toJapanin 1899 by two Cambridge students:Ginnosuke TanakaandEdward Bramwell Clarke.[138][139]The Japan RFU was founded in 1926 and its place in rugby history was cemented when Japan hosted the2019 World Cup.[140]It was the first country outside the Commonwealth, Ireland and France to host the event, and was viewed by the IRB as an opportunity for rugby union to extend its reach,[140]particularly in Asia. Other Asian playing countries of note includeSingapore,South Korea,ChinaandThe Philippines, while the former British colony ofHong Kongis notable within rugby for its development of the rugby sevens game, especially theHong Kong Sevenstournament which was founded in 1976.[141]
Rugby in the Middle East and the Gulf States began in the 1950s, with clubs formed by British and French Services stationed in the region after the Second World War.[142]When these servicemen left, the clubs and teams were kept alive by young professionals, mostly Europeans, working in these countries. The official union ofOmanwas formed in 1971.[143]Bahrainfounded its union a year later, while in 1975 theDubai Sevens, the Gulf's leading rugby tournament, was created. Rugby remains a minority sport in the region withIsraeland theUnited Arab Emirates, as of 2019, being the only member unions from the Middle East to be included in theIRB World Rankings.[144]

## Africa
In 1875, rugby was introduced toSouth Africaby British soldiers garrisoned in Cape Town.[110]The game spread quickly across the country, displacingWinchester College footballas the sport of choice in South Africa and spreading to nearbyZimbabwe. South African settlers also brought the game with them to Namibia and competed against British administrators inBritish East Africa. During the late 19th and early 20th century, the sport in Africa was spread by settlers and colonials who often adopted a "whites-only" policy to playing the game. This resulted in rugby being viewed as abourgeoissport by the indigenous people with limited appeal.[145]Despite this, enclaves of black participation developed notably in theEastern Capeand inHarare. The earliest countries to see the playing of competitive rugby include South Africa, and neighbouringRhodesia(modern-day Zimbabwe), which formed the Rhodesia Rugby Football Union in 1895 and became a regular stop for touring British and New Zealand sides.[146]
In more recent times, the sport has been embraced by several African nations. In the early 21st century Madagascar has experienced crowds of 40,000 at national matches,[147]while Namibia, whose history of rugby can be dated from 1915, have qualified for the final stages of the World Cup seven times since 1999.[148]Other African nations to be represented in the World Rugby Rankings as Member Unions includeCôte d'Ivoire,Kenya,UgandaandZambia.[144]South Africa and Kenya are among the 15 "core teams" that participate in every event of the men'sWorld Rugby Sevens Series.[149]

## Women's rugby union
Records of women's rugby football date from the late 19th century, with the first documented source beingEmily Valentine's writings, in which she states that she set up a rugby team inPortora Royal Schoolin Enniskillen, Ireland in 1887.[150]Although there are reports of early women's matches in New Zealand and France, one of the first notable games to prove primary evidence was the 1917 war-time encounter between Cardiff Ladies and Newport Ladies; a photo of which shows the Cardiff team before the match at theCardiff Arms Park.[151]Since the 1980s, the game has grown in popularity among female athletes, and by 2010, according toWorld Rugby, women's rugby was being played in over 100 countries.[152]
The English-based Women's Rugby Football Union (WRFU), responsible for women's rugby in England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, was founded in 1983, and is the oldest formally organised national governing body for women's rugby. This was replaced in 1994 by theRugby Football Union for Women(RFUW) in England with each of the other Home Nations governing their own countries.[153]
The premier international competition in rugby union for women is theWomen's Rugby World Cup, first held in 1991; from 1994 through 2014, it was held every four years.[153]After the 2014 event, the tournament was brought forward a year to 2017 to avoid clashing with other sporting cycles, in particular theRugby World Cup Sevenscompetition.[154]The Women's Rugby World Cup returned to a four-year cycle after 2017, with future competitions to be held in the middle year of the men's World Cup cycle.

## Rugby World Cup
The most important competition in rugby union is theRugby World Cup, a men's tournament that has taken place every four years since the inaugural event in 1987.South Africaare the reigning champions, having defeated New Zealand 11–12 in the final of the2023 Rugby World Cupin France.[155]South Africa has the highest number of World Cup wins: 4 (1995, 2007, 2019 and 2023).New Zealandwon the title three times (1987, 2011 and 2015), Australia have won twice (1991 and 1999), and England once (2003). England is the only team from the Northern Hemisphere to have won the Rugby World Cup.[156]
The Rugby World Cup has continued to grow since its inception in 1987. The first tournament, in which 16 teams competed for the title, was broadcast to 17 countries with an accumulated total of 230 million television viewers. Ticket sales during the pool stages and finals of the same tournament was less than a million. The2007 World Cupwas contested by 94 countries with ticket sales of 3,850,000 over the pool and final stage. The accumulated television audience for the event, then broadcast to 200 countries, was a claimed 4.2 billion.[157]
The 2019 Rugby World Cup took place in Japan between 20 September and 2 November. It was the ninth edition and the first time the tournament has been held in Asia.[158]

## Regional tournaments
Major international competitions are theSix Nations ChampionshipandThe Rugby Championship, held in Europe and the Southern Hemisphere respectively.[159]
The Six Nations is an annual competition involving the European teamsEngland,France,Ireland,Italy,ScotlandandWales.[160]Each country plays the other five once. Following the first internationals between England and Scotland, Ireland and Wales began competing in the 1880s, forming theHome International Championships.[160]France joined the tournament in the 1900s; in 1910, the termFive Nationsfirst appeared.[160]However, theHome Nations(England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales) excluded France in 1931 amid a run of poor results, allegations of professionalism and concerns over on-field violence.[161]France then rejoined in 1939–1940, though World War II halted proceedings for a further eight years.[160]France has played in all the tournaments since WWII, the first of which was played in 1947.[160]In 2000, Italy became the sixth nation in the contest and Rome'sStadio Olimpicohas replacedStadio Flaminioas the venue for their home games since 2013.[162]
The Rugby Championship is the Southern Hemisphere's annual international series for that region's top national teams. From its inception in 1996 through 2011, it was known as the Tri Nations, as it featured the hemisphere's traditional powers of Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.[163]These teams have dominated world rankings in recent years, and many considered the Tri Nations to be the toughest competition in international rugby.[164][165]The Tri Nations was initially played on a home and away basis with the three nations playing each other twice.[166]
In 2006, a new system was introduced where each nation plays the others three times, though in 2007 and 2011 the teams played each other only twice, as both were World Cup years.[163]Since Argentina's strong performances in the 2007 World Cup,[167]after the 2009 Tri Nations tournament,SANZAR(South Africa, New Zealand and Australian Rugby) invited theArgentine Rugby Union(UAR) to join an expanded Four Nations tournament in 2012.[168]The competition has been officially rechristened as The Rugby Championship beginning with the 2012 edition. The competition reverted to the Tri Nations' original home-and-away format, but now involving four teams. In World Cup years, an abbreviated tournament is held in which each team plays the others only once. In 2020, the "Tri Nations" format was temporarily revived due to the withdrawal of South Africa owing to theCOVID-19 pandemic.[169]

## Rugby within multi-sport events
Rugby union was played at the Olympic Games in1900,1908,1920and1924.[170]As per Olympic rules, the nations of Scotland, Wales and England were not allowed to play separately as they are not sovereign states. In 1900, France won the gold, beating Great Britain 27 points to 8 and defeating Germany 27 points to 17.[170]In 1908, Australia defeated Great Britain, claiming the gold medal, the score being 32 points to three.[170]In 1920, the United States, fielding a team with many players new to the sport of rugby, upset France in a shock win, eight points to zero. In 1924, the United States again defeated France 17 to 3, becoming the only team to win gold twice in the sport.[170]
In 2009, theInternational Olympic Committeevoted with a majority of 81 to 8 that rugby union be reinstated as an Olympic sport in at least the2016and2020games, but in the sevens, 4-day tournament format.[38][171]This is something the rugby world has aspired to for a long time andBernard Lapasset, president of the International Rugby Board, said the Olympic gold medal would be considered to be "the pinnacle of our sport" (Rugby Sevens).[172]
Rugby sevens has been played at theCommonwealth Gamessince the1998 Gamesin Kuala Lumpur.[173]The most gold medal holders areNew Zealandwho have won the competition on four successive occasions until South Africa beat them in 2014.[174]Rugby union has also been anAsian Gamesevent since the1998 gamesin Bangkok, Thailand. In the 1998 and 2002 editions of the games, both the usual fifteen-a-side variety and rugby sevens were played, but from 2006 onwards, only rugby sevens was retained. In 2010, the women's rugby sevens event was introduced. The event is likely to remain a permanent fixture of the Asian Games due to elevation of rugby sevens as an Olympic sport from the 2016 Olympics onwards.

## Women's international rugby
Women's international rugby union began in 1982, with a match betweenFranceand theNetherlandsplayed inUtrecht.[175]As of 2009 over six hundred women's internationals have been played by over forty different nations.[176]
The firstWomen's Rugby World Cupwas held in Walesin 1991and was won by theUnited States.[153]The second tournament took place in1994, and from that time through 2014 was held every four years. The New Zealand Women's team then won four straight World Cups (1998,2002,2006,2010)[177]beforeEnglandwon in2014. Following the 2014 event, World Rugby moved the next edition of the event to2017, with a new four-year cycle from that point forward.[178]New Zealand are the current World Cup holders.
As well as the Women's Rugby World Cup, there are also other regular tournaments (including aSix Nations) run in parallel to the men's competition. The Women's Six Nations, first played in1996has been dominated by England, who have won the tournament on 14 occasions, including a run of seven consecutive wins from2006to2012. However, since then, England have won only in2017; reigning champion France have won in each even-numbered year (2014, 2016, 2018) whilstIrelandwon in 2013 and 2015.

## Professional rugby union
Rugby union has been professionalised since 1995. Professionalism has brought mixed results, with grassroots participation falling and financial struggles in the professional arena.[179]The following table shows professional and semi-professional rugby union competitions.

## Variants
Rugby union has spawned several variants of the full-contact, 15-a-side game. The two most common differences in adapted versions are fewer players and reduced player contact.
The oldest variant isrugby sevens(sometimes 7s or VIIs), a fast-paced game which originated inMelrose, Scotland in 1883. In rugby sevens, there are only seven players per side, and each half is normally seven minutes. Major tournaments include theHong Kong SevensandDubai Sevens, both held in areas not normally associated with the highest levels of the 15-a-side game.
A more recent variant of the sport isrugby tens(10s or Xs), a Malaysian invention with ten players per side.[185]
Touch rugby, in which "tackles" are made by simply touching the ball carrier with two hands, is popular both as a training game and more formally as a mixed sex version of the sport played by both children and adults.[186][187]
Several variants have been created to introduce the sport to children with a less physical contact.[188]Mini rugbyis a version aimed at fostering the sport in children.[189][190]It is played with only eight players and on a smaller pitch.[189]
Tag Rugbyis a version in which the players wear a belt with two tags attached by velcro, the removal of either counting as a 'tackle'. Tag Rugby also varies in that kicking the ball is not allowed.[191]Similar to Tag Rugby,American Flag Rugby, (AFR), is a mixed gender, non-contact imitation of rugby union designed for American children entering grades K-9.[192]Both American Flag Rugby and Mini Rugby differ from Tag Rugby in that they introduce more advanced elements of rugby union as the participants age.[189]
Ten man rugby is a style of play in rugby union in which the team uses the power of its forwards to dominate possession,scrumsandline-outs, and the kicking ability of its fly-half to attain position. The fourthree-quarter backsand the full back are not usually used in attack; if they are, this is usually restricted to the inside centre on thecrash ball, and chasing kicks, especiallygarryowens. Ten man rugby is a very conservative style of play, and not particularly entertaining for the spectator, but can be effective if a team has a strong pack and a good 10, and perhaps less effective backs. The term "ten man rugby" is somewhat derogatory, though most teams will employ these tactics to a degree, especially in foul weather, but usually not exclusively.[193][194][195][196]
Other less formal variants includebeach rugbyandsnow rugby.[188][197]

## Influence on other sports
Rugby leaguewas formed after the Northern Union broke from the Rugby Football Union in a disagreement over payment to players. It went on to change its laws and became afootball codein its own right. The two sports continue to influence each other to this day.
American football[198][199]andCanadian football[200]are derived from early forms of rugby football.[200]
Australian rules footballwas influenced byrugby footballandother games originating in English public schools.[201][202][203]
James Naismithtook aspects of many sports including rugby to inventbasketball.[204]The most obvious contribution is thejump ball's similarity to the line-out as well as the underhand shooting style that dominated the early years of the sport. Naismith played rugby atMcGill University.[205]
Swedish footballwas a code whose rules were a mix ofAssociationandRugby football rules.[206][207]
Rugby lends its name towheelchair rugby, a full-contact sport which contains elements of rugby such as crossing a try line with the ball to score.[208]

## Statistics and records
According to a 2023 report by the Centre for the International Business of Sport, over ten million people play rugby union or one of its variants organised by the IRB.[209]This is a significant increase since the previous report in 2011.[210]The report also claimed that since 2011 participation has grown by 33 per cent in Africa, 28 per cent in South America and 18 per cent in Asia and North America.[210]In 2023 the IRB published a breakdown of the total number of players worldwide by national unions. It recorded a total of 10.9 million players globally, of those, 8.4 million were registered members playing for a club affiliated to their country's union.[2]The 2016 World Rugby Year in Review reported 8.5 million players, of which 3.2 million were registered union players and 1.9 million were registered club players; 22% of all players were female.[211]
The most capped international player from thetier 1 nationsis Welsh captainAlun Wyn Joneswho has played over 150 internationals.
While the top scoring tier 1 international player is New Zealand'sDan Carter, who has amassed 1442 points during his career.[212]In April 2010Lithuaniawhich is a second tier rugby nation, broke the record of consecutive international wins for second tier rugby nations. In 2016, the All Blacks of New Zealand set the new record 18 consecutive test wins among tier 1 rugby nations, bettering their previous consecutive run of 17.[213]This record was equalled by England on 11 March 2017 with a win over Scotland at Twickenham.[214]The highest scoring international match between two recognised unions was Hong Kong's 164–13 victory over Singapore on 27 October 1994.[215]While the largest winning margin of 152 points is held by two countries, Japan (a 155–3 win over Chinese Taipei) and Argentina (152–0 over Paraguay) both in 2002.[215]
The record attendance for a rugby union game was set on 15 July 2000 in which New Zealand defeated Australia 39–35 in a Bledisloe Cup game atStadium AustraliainSydneybefore 109,874 fans.[216]The record attendance for a match in Europe of 104,000 (at the time a world record) was set on 1 March 1975 whenScotlanddefeatedWales12–10 atMurrayfieldinEdinburghduring the1975 Five Nations Championship.[216]This crowd however is an estimate and contemporaneous newspaper accounts list a crowd of 80,000 only. The record attendance for a domestic club match is 99,124, set whenRacing 92defeatedToulonin the2016 Top 14 finalon 24 June atCamp NouinBarcelona. The match had been moved from its normal site ofStade de Francenear Paris due to scheduling conflicts with France's hosting ofUEFA Euro 2016.[217]The record attendance for a regular season club fixture is 83,761, set whenHarlequinsplayedSaracensatWembley Stadiumduring aPremiershipgame in 2012.[218]

## In culture
Thomas Hughes's 1857 novelTom Brown's Schooldays, set atRugby School, includes a rugby football match, also portrayed in the 1940s film of the same name. James Joyce mentions Irish teamBective Rangersin several of his works, includingUlysses(1922) andFinnegans Wake(1939), while his 1916 semi-autobiographical workA Portrait of the Artist as a Young Manhas an account of Ireland internationalJames Magee.[219]Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, in his 1924 Sherlock Holmes taleThe Adventure of the Sussex Vampire, mentions that Dr Watson played rugby for Blackheath.[220]
Henri Rousseau's 1908 workJoueurs de footballshows two pairs of rugby players competing.[221]Other French artists to have represented the sport in their works includeAlbert Gleizes'Les Joueurs de football(1912),Robert Delaunay'sFootball. L'Équipe de Cardiff(1916) andAndré Lhote'sPartie de Rugby(1917).[222]The1928 Gold Medal for Artat the Amsterdam Olympics was won by Luxembourg'sJean Jacobyfor his workRugby.[223]
In film, Ealing Studios' 1949 comedyA Run for Your Moneyand the 1979 BBC Wales television filmGrand Slamboth centre on fans attending a match.[224]Films that explore the sport in more detail include independent productionOld Scores(1991) andForever Strong(2008).Invictus(2009), based onJohn Carlin's bookPlaying the Enemy, explores the events of the1995 Rugby World CupandNelson Mandela's attempt to use the sport to connect South Africa's people post-apartheid.[225][226]
In public art and sculpture, there are many works dedicated to the sport. There is a 27 feet (8.2 m) bronze statue of a rugby line-out by pop artistGerald LaingatTwickenham[227]and one of rugby administrator SirTasker Watkinsat theMillennium Stadium.[228]Rugby players to have been honoured with statues includeGareth Edwardsin Cardiff andDanie Cravenin Stellenbosch.[229]

## Sources
Printed sources
Electronic sources