## Ship
Ashipis a largewatercraftdesigned for travel across the surface of abody of water, carryingcargoorpassengers, or in support of specialized tasks such aswarfare,oceanographyandfishing. Ships are generally distinguished fromboats, based on size, shape, load capacity and purpose. Ships have supportedexploration,trade,warfare,migration,colonization, andscience.Ship transportis responsible for the largest portion of world commerce.
The wordshiphas meant, depending on era and context, either simply a large vessel or specifically afull-rigged shipwith three or moremasts, each of which issquare rigged.
The earliest historical evidence of boats is found in Egypt during the 4th millennium BC.[1]In 2024, ships had a global cargo capacity of 2.4 billion tons, with the three largest classes being ships carrying dry bulk (43%), oil tankers (28%) and container ships (14%).[2]

## Nomenclature
Ships are typically larger than boats, but there is no universally accepted distinction between the two. Ships generally can remain at sea for longer periods of time than boats.[3]A legal definition of ship fromIndiancase lawis a vessel that carries goods by sea.[4]A common notion is that a ship can carry a boat, but notvice versa.[5]A ship is likely to have a full-time crew assigned.[6]A US Navy rule of thumb is that shipsheeltowards theoutsideof a sharp turn, whereas boats heel towards theinside[7]because of the relative location of thecenter of massversus thecenter of buoyancy.[8][9]American and British 19th century maritime law distinguished "vessels" from other watercraft; ships and boats fall in one legal category, whereas open boats and rafts are not considered vessels.[10]
Starting around the middle of the 18th century, sailing vessels started to be categorised by their type ofrig. (Previously they were described by their hull type – for examplepink,cat.) Alongside the other rig types such asschoonerandbrig,[a]the term "ship" referred to the rig type. In this sense, a ship is a vessel with three or more masts, all of which aresquare-rigged. For clarity, this may be referred to as afull-rigged shipor a vessel may be described as "ship-rigged".[b]Alongside this rig-specific usage, "ship" continued to have the more general meaning of a large sea-going vessel. Often the meaning can only be determined by the context.[13]: 71–73[14]: 2
Some large vessels are traditionally calledboats, notablysubmarines.[15]Others includeGreat Lakes freighters,riverboats, andferryboats, which may be designed for operation on inland or protected coastal waters.[10]
In most maritime traditions ships haveindividual names, and modern ships may belong to aship classoften named after its first ship.
In many documents the ship name is introduced with aship prefixbeing an abbreviation of the ship class, for example "MS" (motor ship) or "SV" (sailing vessel), making it easier to distinguish a ship name from other individual names in a text.
"Ship" (along with "nation") is an English word that has retained a femalegrammatical genderin some usages, which allows it to sometimes be referred to as a "she" without being of femalenatural gender.[16]TheImperial War Museumstated that this may have originated from "far more ancient traditions" which included using a female grammatical gender for ships, and that there is a tradition that "relates to the idea of a female figure such as a mother or goddess guiding and protecting a ship and crew."[17]By 2019, theLloyd's Register of Shippingswitched to referring to ships as "it".[17]

## History
For most of history, transport by ship – provided there is a feasible route –  has generally been cheaper, safer and faster than making the same journey on land. Only the coming of railways in the middle of the 19th century and the growth of commercial aviation in the second half of the 20th century have changed this principle. This applied equally to sea crossings, coastal voyages and use of rivers and lakes.[18]: 15
Examples of the consequences of this include the largegrain tradein the Mediterranean during theclassical period. Cities such as Rome were totally reliant on the delivery by sailing and human powered (oars) ships of the large amounts of grain needed. It has been estimated that it cost less for a sailing ship of the Roman Empire to carry grain the length of the Mediterranean than to move the same amount 15 miles by road. Rome consumed about 150,000 tons of Egyptian grain each year over the first three centuries AD.[19]: 297[20]: 147[c]
Until recently, it was generally the case that ships were the most advanced representations of the technology available to the societies that produced them.[18]: 1

## Asian developments
The earliest attestations of ships inmaritime transportinMesopotamiaaremodel ships, which date back to the 4th millennium BC. In archaic texts inUruk,Sumer, the ideogram for "ship" is attested, but in the inscriptions of the kings ofLagash, ships were first mentioned in connection tomaritime tradeandnaval warfareat around 2500–2350 BC.[22]
Austronesian peoplesoriginated in what is nowTaiwan. From here, they took part in theAustronesian Expansion. Their distinctive maritime technology was integral to this movement and includedcatamaransandoutriggers. It has been suggested that they had sails some time before 2000 BC.[23]: 144Theircrab claw sailsenabled them to sail for vast distances in open ocean.  From Taiwan, they rapidly colonized the islands ofMaritime Southeast Asia, then sailed further onwards toMicronesia,Island Melanesia,Polynesia, andMadagascar, eventually colonizing a territory spanning half the globe.[24][25]
Austronesian sails were made from woven leaves, usually frompandanplants.[26][27]These were complemented by paddlers, who usually positioned themselves on platforms on theoutriggersin the larger boats.[24][28]Austronesian ships ranged in complexity from simpledugout canoeswith outriggers or lashed together to large edge-pegged plank-built boats built around a keel made from a dugout canoe. Their designs were unique, evolving from ancient rafts to the characteristic double-hulled, single-outrigger, and double-outrigger designs of Austronesian ships.[25][28]
In the 2nd century AD, people from theIndonesian archipelagoalready made large ships measuring over 50 m long and standing 4–7 m out of the water. They could carry 600–1000 people and 250–1000 ton cargo. These ships were known askunlun boork'unlun po(崑崙舶, lit. "ship of theKunlunpeople") by the Chinese, andkolandiaphontaby the Greeks. They had 4–7 masts and were able to sail against the wind due to the usage oftanja sails. These ships may have reached as far asGhana.[29]: 41[30]: 262[31]: 347In the 11th century, a new type of ship calleddjongor jong was recorded inJavaandBali.[32]: 222, 230, 267[33]: 82This type of ship was built using wooden dowels and treenails, unlike thekunlun bowhich used vegetal fibres for lashings.[34]: 138
In China, miniature models of ships that feature steering oars have been dated to theWarring States period(c. 475–221 BC).[35]By theHan dynasty, a well kept naval fleet was an integral part of the military. Centre-line rudders, mounted at the stern, started to appear on Chinese ship models starting in the 1st century AD.[d][35]However, these early Chinese ships were fluvial (riverine), and were not seaworthy.[37]: 20[38]The Chinese only acquired sea-going ship technologies in the 10th-century ADSong dynastyafter contact with Southeast Asiank'un-lun potrading ships, leading to the development of thejunks.[39][37]: 20–21

## Mediterranean developments
The earliest historical evidence of boats is found in Egypt during the 4th millennium BC[1]TheGreekhistorianandgeographerAgatharchideshad documented ship-faring among the earlyEgyptians:"During the prosperous period of theOld Kingdom, between the30thand25thcenturies BC, theriver-routes were kept in order, andEgyptianships sailed theRed Seaas far as themyrrh-country."[40]
Theancient Egyptianswere perfectly at ease building sailboats. A remarkable example of theirshipbuildingskills was theKhufu ship, a vessel 143 feet (44 m) in length entombed at the foot of theGreat Pyramid of Gizaaround 2500 BC and found intact in 1954.
The oldest discovered sea faring hulled boat is theLate Bronze AgeUluburunshipwreck off the coast of Turkey, dating back to 1300 BC.[41]
By 1200 BC, thePhoenicianswere building large merchant ships. In world maritime history, declares Richard Woodman, they are recognized as "the first true seafarers, founding the art of pilotage,cabotage, and navigation" and the architects of "the first true ship, built of planks, capable of carrying a deadweight cargo and being sailed and steered."[42]

## Asian developments
During the 15th century, China'sMing dynastyassembled one of the largest and most powerful naval fleets in the world for thediplomatic and power projection voyagesofZheng He. Elsewhere in Japan in the 15th century, one of the world's first iron-clads, "Tekkōsen" (鉄甲船), literally meaning "iron ships",[43]was also developed. In Japan, during theSengoku erafrom the 15th century to 17th century, the great struggle for feudal supremacy was fought, in part, by coastal fleets of several hundred boats, including theatakebune. In Korea, in the early 15th century during theJoseonera, "Geobukseon"(거북선), was developed.
The empire ofMajapahitused large ships calledjong, built in northern Java, for transporting troops overseas.[44]: 115The jongs were transport ships which could carry 100–2000 tons of cargo and 50–1000 people, 28.99–88.56 meter in length.[45]: 60–62The exact number of jong fielded by Majapahit is unknown, but the largest number of jong deployed in an expedition is about 400 jongs, when Majapahit attacked Pasai, in 1350.[46]

## European developments
Until the late 13th or early 14th century, European shipbuilding had two separate traditions. In Northern Europe[e]clinker constructionpredominated. In this, the hull planks are fastened together in an overlapping manner. This is a "shell first" construction technique, with the hull shape being defined by the shaping and fitting of the hull planks. The reinforcingframes (or ribs) are fitted after the planks.[18]: 65–66Clinker construction in this era usually used planks that were cleft (split radially from the log) and could be made thinner and stronger per unit of thickness than the sawn logs, thanks to preserving the radial integrity of the grain.[47][48][18]: 53–54
An exception to clinker construction in the Northern European tradition is the bottom planking of thecog. Here, the hull planks are not joined to each other and are laid flush (not overlapped). They are held together by fastening to the frames[f]but this is done after the shaping and fitting of these planks. Therefore, this is another case of a "shell first" construction technique.[g][18]: 65–66
These Northern European ships were rigged with a single mast setting asquare sail. They were steered by rudders hung on thesternpost.[18]: 69
In contrast, the ship-building tradition of the Mediterranean was ofcarvel construction– the fitting of the hull planking to the frames of the hull. Depending on the precise detail of this method, it may be characterised as either "frame first" or "frame-led". In either variant, during construction, the hull shape is determined by the frames, not the planking. The hull planks are not fastened to each other, only to the frames.[18]: 69
These Mediterranean ships were rigged withlateensails on one or more masts (depending on the size of the vessel) and were steered with a side rudder. They are often referred to as "round ships".[18]: 68-69
Crucially, the Mediterranean and Northern European traditions merged. Cogs[h]are known to have travelled to the Mediterranean in the 12th and 13th centuries. Some aspects of their designs were being copied by Mediterranean ship-builders early in the 14th century. Iconography shows square sails being used on the mainmast but a lateen on the mizzen,[i]and a sternpost hung rudder replacing the side rudder. The name for this type of vessel was "coche" or, for a larger example, "carrack". Some of these new Mediterranean types travelled to Northern European waters and, in the first two decades of the 15th century, a few were captured by the English, two of which had previously been under charter to the French. The two-masted rig started to be copied immediately, but at this stage on a clinker hull. The adoption of carvel hulls had to wait until sufficient shipwrights with appropriate skills could be hired, but by late in the 1430s, there were instances of carvel ships being built in Northern Europe, and in increasing numbers over the rest of the century.[18]: 69-72
This hybridisation of Mediterranean and Northern European ship types created thefull-rigged ship, a three-masted vessel with a square-rigged foremast and mainmast and a lateen sail on the mizzen. This provided most of the ships used in theAge of Discovery, being able to carry sufficient stores for a long voyage and with a rig suited to the open ocean. Over the next four hundred years, steady evolution and development, from the starting point of thecarrack, gave types such as thegalleon,fluit,East Indiaman, ordinary cargo ships, warships,clippersand many more, all based on this three-masted square-rigged type.[13]: 29,passim
The transition from clinker to carvel construction facilitated the use of artillery at sea since the internal framing of the hull could be made strong enough to accommodate the weight of guns. It was easier to fit gunports in a carvel hull. As vessels became larger and the demand for ship-building timber affected the size of trees available, clinker construction became limited by the difficulty of finding large enough logs from which to cleave planks. Nonetheless, some clinker vessels approached the size of contemporary carracks.[j]Before the adoption of carvel construction, the increasing size of clinker-built vessels necessitated greater amounts of internal framing of their hulls for strength – something that somewhat lessened the conceptual change to the new technique.[18]: 55, 58–60

## 19th and 20th centuries
Parallel to the development of warships, ships in service of marine fishery and trade also developed in the period between antiquity and the Renaissance.
Maritime trade was driven by the development of shipping companies with significant financial resources. Canal barges, towed by draft animals on an adjacenttowpath, contended with therailwayup to and past the early days of theIndustrial Revolution. Flat-bottomed and flexiblescowboats also became widely used for transporting small cargoes. Mercantile trade went hand-in-hand with exploration, self-financed by the commercial benefits of exploration.
During the first half of the 18th century, theFrench Navybegan to develop a new type of vessel known as aship of the line, featuring seventy-four guns. This type of ship became the backbone of all European fighting fleets. These ships were 56 metres (184 ft) long and their construction required 2,800 oak trees and 40 kilometres (25 mi) of rope; they carried a crew of about 800 sailors and soldiers. During the 19th century theRoyal Navyenforced a ban on theslave trade, acted to suppresspiracy, and continued to map the world. Ships and their owners grew with the 19th centuryIndustrial Revolutionacross Europe and North America, leading to increased numbers of oceangoing ships, as well as other coastal and canal based vessels.[50][51]
Through more than half of the 19th century and into the early years of the 20th century,steam shipscoexisted with sailing vessels. Initially, steam was only viable on shorter routes, typically transporting passengers who could afford higher fares, and mail. Steam went through many developmental steps that gave greater fuel efficiency, thereby increasingly making steamships commercially competitive with sail. Screw propulsion worked better thanpaddle wheels, but relied, among other things, on the invention of an effectivestern glandfor thepropellershaft. Higher boiler pressures of 60 pounds per square inch (410 kPa) poweringcompoundengines, wereintroducedin 1865, making long-distance steam cargo vessels commercially viable on the route from England to China – even before the opening of theSuez Canalin 1869. Within a few years, steam had replaced many of the sailing ships that had served this route. Even greater fuel efficiency was obtained with triple-expansion steam engines – but this had to wait for higher quality steel to be available to make boilers running at 125 pounds per square inch (860 kPa) inSS Aberdeen (1881). By this point virtually all routes could be served competitively by steamships. Sail continued with some cargoes, where low costs were more important to the shipper than a predictable and rapid journey time.[52]: 99–100,passim[53][54]: 106–111[55]: 89
TheSecond Industrial Revolutionin particular led to new mechanical methods ofpropulsion, and the ability to construct ships from metal triggered an explosion in ship design.[56]These led to the development of long-distance commercial ships andOcean liners, as well as technological changes including theMarine steam engine, screw propellers, triple expansion engines and others.[57][58]Factors included the quest for more efficient ships, the end of long running and wasteful maritime conflicts, and the increased financial capacity of industrial powers created more specialized ships and other maritime vessels. Ship types built for entirely new functions that appeared by the 20th century includedresearch ships,offshore support vessels(OSVs),Floating production storage and offloading(FPSOs),Pipe and cable laying ships, drill ships andSurvey vessels.[59]
The late 20th century saw changes to ships that included the decline of ocean liners as air travel increased. The rise ofcontainer shipsfrom the 1960s onwards dramatically changed the nature of commercial merchant shipping, as containerization led to larger ship sizes, dedicated container routes and the decline of general cargo vessels as well as tramp steaming.[60]The late 20th century also saw a rise incruise shipsfor tourism around the world.[61]

## 21st century
In 2016, there were more than 49,000merchant ships, totaling almost 1.8 billiondeadweight tons. Of these 28% wereoil tankers, 43% werebulk carriers, and 13% werecontainer ships.[62]By 2019, the world's fleet included 51,684 commercial vessels withgross tonnageof more than 1,000tons, totaling 1.96 billion tons.[63]Such ships carried 11 billion tons of cargo in 2018, a sum that grew by 2.7% over the previous year.[64]In terms of tonnage, 29% of ships weretankers, 43% arebulk carriers, 13%container shipsand 15% were other types.[65]
In 2008, there were 1,240warshipsoperating in the world, not counting small vessels such aspatrol boats. TheUnited Statesaccounted for 3 million tons worth of these vessels,Russia1.35 million tons, theUnited Kingdom504,660 tons andChina402,830 tons. The 20th century saw many naval engagements during the twoworld wars, theCold War, and the rise to power of naval forces of the two blocs. The world's major powers have recently used their naval power in cases such as theUnited Kingdomin theFalkland Islandsand theUnited StatesinIraq.
The size of the world'sfishing fleetis more difficult to estimate. The largest of these are counted as commercial vessels, but the smallest are legion.Fishing vesselscan be found in most seaside villages in the world. As of 2004, the United NationsFood and Agriculture Organizationestimated 4 million fishing vessels were operating worldwide.[66]The same study estimated that the world's 29 million fishermen[67]caught 85,800,000tonnes(84,400,000long tons; 94,600,000short tons) of fish and shellfish that year.[68]
In 2023, the number of ships globally grew by 3.4%.[2]In 2024, new ships are increasingly being built with alternative fuel capability to increase sustainability and reduce carbon emissions.[2]Alternative ship fuels includeLNG,LPG,methanol,biofuel,ammoniaandhydrogenamong others.[69][70][71]
As of 2024, wind power for ships had received renewed interest for its potential to mitigategreenhouse gas emissions.[72][73][74]

## Types of ships
Because ships are constructed using the principles of naval architecture that require same structural components, their classification is based on their function such as that suggested by Paulet and Presles,[75]which requires modification of the components. The categories accepted in general by naval architects are:[76]
Some of these are discussed in the following sections.

## Inland vessels
Freshwater shipping may occur on lakes, rivers and canals. Ships designed for those body of waters may be specially adapted to the widths and depths of specific waterways. Examples of freshwater waterways that are navigable in part by large vessels include theDanube,Mississippi,Rhine,YangtzeandAmazonRivers, and theGreat Lakes.

## Great Lakes
Lake freighters, also called lakers, arecargovessels that ply theGreat Lakes. The most well-known isSSEdmund Fitzgerald, the latest major vessel to be wrecked on the Lakes. These vessels are traditionally called boats, not ships. Visiting ocean-going vessels are called "salties". Because of their additionalbeam, very large salties are never seen inland of theSaint Lawrence Seaway. Because the smallest of theSoo Locksis larger than any Seaway lock, salties that can pass through the Seaway may travel anywhere in the Great Lakes. Because of their deeper draft, salties may accept partial loads on the Great Lakes, "topping off" when they have exited the Seaway. Similarly, the largest lakers are confined to the Upper Lakes (Superior,Michigan,Huron,Erie) because they are too large to use the Seaway locks, beginning at theWelland Canalthat bypasses theNiagara River.
Since thefreshwaterlakes are less corrosive to ships than thesalt waterof the oceans, lakers tend to last much longer than ocean freighters. Lakers older than 50 years are not unusual, and as of 2005, all were over 20 years of age.[77]
SSSt. Marys Challenger, built in 1906 asWilliam P Snyder, was the oldest laker still working on the Lakes until its conversion into a barge starting in 2013. Similarly,E.M. Ford, built in 1898 asPresque Isle, was sailing the lakes 98 years later in 1996. As of 2007E.M. Fordwas still afloat as a stationary transfer vessel at a riverside cement silo inSaginaw, Michigan.

## Merchant ship
Merchant shipsare ships used for commercial purposes and can be divided into four broad categories:fishing vessels,cargo ships,passenger ships, and special-purpose ships.[78]TheUNCTAD review of maritime transportcategorizes ships as: oil tankers, bulk (and combination) carriers, general cargo ships, container ships, and "other ships", which includes "liquefied petroleum gascarriers,liquefied natural gascarriers, parcel (chemical) tankers, specialized tankers,reefers, offshore supply, tugs,dredgers,cruise,ferries, other non-cargo". General cargo ships include "multi-purpose and project vessels and roll-on/roll-off cargo".[62]
Modern commercial vessels are typically powered by a single propeller driven by adieselor, less usually,gas turbine engine.,[79]but until the mid-19th century they were predominantly square sail rigged. The fastest vessels may usepump-jet engines.[citation needed]Most commercial vessels such as container ships, have full hull-forms (higherBlock coefficients) to maximize cargo capacity.[80]Merchant ships and fishing vessels are usually made of steel, although aluminum can be used on faster craft, and fiberglass or wood on smaller vessels.[81]Commercial vessels generally have a crew headed by asea captain, withdeck officersandengine officerson larger vessels. Special-purpose vessels often have specialized crew if necessary, for example scientists aboardresearch vessels.
Fishing boats are generally small, often little more than 30 meters (98 ft) but up to 100 metres (330 ft) for a large tuna orwhaling ship. Aboard afish processing vessel, the catch can be made ready for market and sold more quickly once the ship makes port. Special purpose vessels have special gear. For example, trawlers have winches and arms, stern-trawlers have a rear ramp, and tuna seiners have skiffs. In 2004, 85,800,000tonnes(84,400,000long tons; 94,600,000short tons) of fish were caught in the marine capture fishery.[82]Anchovetarepresented the largest single catch at 10,700,000 tonnes (10,500,000 long tons; 11,800,000 short tons).[82]That year, the top ten marine capture species also includedAlaska pollock,Blue whiting,Skipjack tuna,Atlantic herring,Chub mackerel,Japanese anchovy,Chilean jack mackerel,Largehead hairtail, andYellowfin tuna.[82]Other species includingsalmon,shrimp,lobster,clams,squidandcrab, are also commercially fished. Modern commercial fishermen use many methods. One is fishing bynets, such aspurse seine, beach seine, lift nets,gillnets, or entangling nets. Another istrawling, includingbottom trawl.Hooksand lines are used in methods likelong-line fishingandhand-line fishing. Another method is the use offishing trap.
Cargo ships transport dry and liquid cargo. Dry cargo can be transported in bulk bybulk carriers, packed directly onto ageneral cargo shipin break-bulk, packed inintermodal containersas aboard acontainer ship, or driven aboard as inroll-on roll-off ships. Liquid cargo is generally carried in bulk aboard tankers, such asoil tankerswhich may include both crude and finished products of oil,chemical tankerswhich may also carry vegetable oils other than chemicals andgas carriers, although smaller shipments may be carried on container ships intank containers.[83]
Passenger shipsrange in size from small river ferries to very largecruise ships. This type of vessel includesferries, which move passengers and vehicles on short trips;ocean liners, which carry passengers from one place to another; andcruise ships, which carry passengers on voyages undertaken for pleasure, visiting several places and with leisure activities on board, often returning them to the port of embarkation.Riverboatsandinland ferriesare specially designed to carry passengers, cargo, or both in the challenging river environment. Rivers present special hazards to vessels. They usually have varying water flows that alternately lead to high speed water flows or protruding rock hazards. Changing siltation patterns may cause the sudden appearance of shoal waters, and often floating or sunken logs and trees (called snags) can endanger the hulls and propulsion of riverboats. Riverboats are generally of shallow draft, being broad of beam and rather square in plan, with a low freeboard and high topsides. Riverboats can survive with this type of configuration as they do not have to withstand the high winds or large waves that are seen on large lakes, seas, or oceans.
Fishing vesselsare a subset of commercial vessels, but generally small in size and often subject to different regulations and classification. They can be categorized by several criteria: architecture, the type of fish they catch, the fishing method used, geographical origin, and technical features such as rigging. As of 2004, the world's fishing fleet consisted of some 4 million vessels.[66]Of these, 1.3 million were decked vessels with enclosed areas and the rest were open vessels.[66]Most decked vessels were mechanized, but two-thirds of the open vessels were traditional craft propelled by sails and oars.[66]More than 60% of all existing large fishing vessels[k]were built in Japan, Peru, the Russian Federation, Spain or the United States of America.[84]

## Special purpose vessels
Aweather shipwas a ship stationed in theoceanas a platform for surface and upper air meteorological observations for use inmarine weather forecasting. Surface weather observations were taken hourly, and four radiosonde releases occurred daily.[85]It was also meant to aid in search and rescue operations and to support transatlantic flights.[85][86]Proposed as early as 1927 by theaviationcommunity,[87]the establishment of weather ships proved to be so useful duringWorld War IIthat theInternational Civil Aviation Organization(ICAO) established a global network of weather ships in 1948, with 13 to be supplied by the United States.[86]This number was eventually negotiated down to nine.[88]
The weather ship crews were normally at sea for three weeks at a time, returning to port for 10-day stretches.[85]Weather ship observations proved to be helpful in wind and wave studies, as they did not avoid weather systems like other ships tended to for safety reasons.[89]They were also helpful in monitoring storms at sea, such astropical cyclones.[90]The removal of a weather ship became a negative factor in forecasts leading up to theGreat Storm of 1987.[91]Beginning in the 1970s, their role became largely superseded byweather buoysdue to the ships' significant cost.[92]The agreement of the use of weather ships by the international community ended in 1990. The last weather ship wasPolarfront, known as weather station M ("Mike"), which was put out of operation on 1 January 2010. Weather observations from ships continue from a fleet ofvoluntary merchant vesselsin routine commercial operation.

## Naval vessels
Naval shipsare diverse intypes of vessel. They include:surface warships,submarines, andauxiliary ships.
Modern warships are generally divided into seven main categories:aircraft carriers,cruisers,destroyers,frigates,corvettes,submarinesandamphibious warfare ships. The distinctions among cruisers, destroyers, frigates, and corvettes are not codified; the same vessel may be described differently in different navies.Battleshipswere used during theSecond World Warand occasionally since then (the last battleships were removed from theU.S. Naval Vessel Registerin March 2006), but were made obsolete by the use ofcarrier-borne aircraftandguided missiles.[93]
Most military submarines are eitherattack submarinesorballistic missile submarines. Until the end ofWorld War IIthe primary role of the diesel/electric submarine was anti-ship warfare, inserting and removing covert agents and military forces, and intelligence-gathering. With the development of thehoming torpedo, bettersonarsystems, andnuclear propulsion, submarines also became able to effectively hunt each other. The development ofsubmarine-launched nuclearandcruise missilesgave submarines a substantial and long-ranged ability to attack both land and sea targets with a variety of weapons ranging fromcluster munitionstonuclear weapons.
Mostnaviesalso include many types of support and auxiliary vessel, such asminesweepers,patrol boats,offshore patrol vessels,replenishment ships, andhospital shipswhich are designatedmedical treatmentfacilities.[94]
Fast combat vessels such as cruisers and destroyers usually have fine hulls to maximize speed and maneuverability.[95]They also usually have advancedmarine electronicsand communication systems, as well as weapons.

## Architecture
Some components exist in vessels of any size and purpose. Every vessel has a hull of sorts. Every vessel has some sort of propulsion, whether it's a pole, an ox, or a nuclear reactor. Most vessels have some sort of steering system. Other characteristics are common, but not as universal, such as compartments, holds, a superstructure, and equipment such as anchors and winches.

## Hull
For a ship to float, its weight must be less than that of the water displaced by the ship's hull.[96]There are many types of hulls, from logs lashed together to form a raft to the advanced hulls ofAmerica's Cupsailboats. A vessel may have a single hull (called a monohull design), two in the case ofcatamarans, or three in the case oftrimarans. Vessels with more than three hulls are rare, but some experiments have been conducted with designs such as pentamarans. Multiple hulls are generally parallel to each other and connected by rigid arms.
Hulls have several elements. Thebowis the foremost part of the hull. Many ships feature abulbous bow. Thekeelis at the very bottom of the hull, extending the entire length of the ship. The rear part of the hull is known as thestern, and many hulls have a flat back known as atransom. Common hull appendages includepropellersfor propulsion,ruddersfor steering, andstabilizersto quell a ship's rolling motion. Other hull features can be related to the vessel's work, such as fishing gear andsonar domes.
Hulls are subject to various hydrostatic and hydrodynamic constraints. The key hydrostatic constraint is that it must be able to support the entire weight of the boat, and maintain stability even with often unevenly distributed weight. Hydrodynamic constraints include the ability to withstand shock waves, weather collisions and groundings.
Older ships and pleasure craft often have or had wooden hulls. Steel is used for most commercial vessels. Aluminium is frequently used for fast vessels, andcomposite materialsare often found in sailboats and pleasure craft. Some ships have been made withconcrete hulls.

## Propulsion systems
Propulsion systems for ships fall into three categories: human propulsion,sailing, and mechanical propulsion. Human propulsion includesrowing, which was used even on largegalleys. Propulsion by sail generally consists of a sail hoisted on an erect mast, supported by stays and spars and controlled by ropes. Sail systems were the dominant form of propulsion until the 19th century. They are now generally used for recreation and competition, although experimental sail systems, such as theturbosails,rotorsails, andwingsailshave been used on larger modern vessels for fuel savings.
Mechanicalpropulsion systemsgenerally consist of a motor or engine turning apropeller, or less frequently, animpellerorwave propulsion fins.Steam engineswere first used for this purpose, but have mostly been replaced bytwo-strokeorfour-strokediesel engines, outboard motors, andgas turbine engineson faster ships.Nuclear reactorsproducing steam are used to propelwarshipsandicebreakers, and there have been attempts to use them to power commercial vessels (seeNSSavannah).
In addition to traditional fixed and controllable pitch propellers there are many specialized variations, such as contra-rotating and nozzle-style propellers. Most vessels have a single propeller, but some large vessels may have up to four propellers supplemented withtransverse thrustersfor maneuvring at ports. The propeller is connected to the main engine via a propeller shaft and, in case of medium- and high-speed engines, a reduction gearbox. Some modern vessels have adiesel–electric powertrainin which the propeller is turned by anelectric motorpowered by the ship's generators.
As environmental sustainability becomes a paramount concern, the maritime industry is exploring cleaner propulsion technologies. Alternatives like LPG (Liquefied Petroleum Gas), ammonia, and hydrogen are emerging as viable options. LPG is already utilized as fuel for long-distance shipping,[97]offering a cleaner option with a lower carbon footprint. Meanwhile, hydrogen and ammonia technologies are in development stages for long-haul applications, promising even more significant reductions in emissions and a step closer to achievingcarbon-neutral shipping.

## Steering systems
For ships with independent propulsion systems for each side, such as manual oars or somepaddles,[l]steering systems may not be necessary. In most designs, such as boats propelled by engines or sails, a steering system becomes necessary. The most common is a rudder, a submerged plane located at the rear of the hull. Rudders are rotated to generate a lateral force which turns the boat. Rudders can be rotated by atiller, manual wheels, or electro-hydraulic systems.Autopilotsystems combine mechanical rudders with navigation systems.Ducted propellersare sometimes used for steering.
Some propulsion systems are inherently steering systems. Examples include theoutboard motor, thebow thruster, and theazimuth thruster.

## Holds, compartments, and the superstructure
Larger boats and ships generally have multiple decks and compartments. Separateberthingsandheadsare found on sailboats over about 25 feet (7.6 m). Fishing boats and cargo ships typically have one or more cargo holds. Most larger vessels have an engine room, agalley, and various compartments for work. Tanks are used to store fuel, engine oil, and fresh water. Ballast tanks are equipped to change a ship's trim and modify its stability.
Superstructures are found above the main deck. On sailboats, these are usually very low. On modern cargo ships, they are almost always located near the ship's stern. On passenger ships and warships, the superstructure generally extends far forward.

## Equipment
Shipboard equipment varies from ship to ship depending on such factors as the ship's era, design, area of operation, and purpose. Some types of equipment that are widely found include:[citation needed]

## Hydrostatics
Ships float in the water at a level where mass of the displaced water equals the mass of the vessel, so that the downwards force ofgravityequals the upward force ofbuoyancy. As a vessel is lowered into the water its weight remains constant but the corresponding weight of water displaced by its hull increases. If the vessel's mass is evenly distributed throughout, it floats evenly along its length and across itsbeam(width). A vessel's stability is considered in both thishydrostaticsense as well as ahydrodynamicsense, when subjected to movement, rolling and pitching, and the action of waves and wind. Stability problems can lead to excessive pitching and rolling, and eventually capsizing and sinking.[99]

## Hydrodynamics
The advance of a vessel through water is resisted by the water. This resistance can be broken down into several components, the main ones being the friction of the water on the hull andwave making resistance. To reduce resistance and therefore increase the speed for a given power, it is necessary to reduce the wetted surface and use submerged hull shapes that produce low amplitude waves. To do so, high-speed vessels are often more slender, with fewer or smaller appendages. The friction of the water is also reduced by regular maintenance of the hull to remove the sea creatures and algae that accumulate there.Antifoulingpaint is commonly used to assist in this. Advanced designs such as thebulbous bowassist in decreasing wave resistance.
A simple way of considering wave-making resistance is to look at the hull in relation to its wake. At speeds lower than the wave propagation speed, the wave rapidly dissipates to the sides. As the hull approaches the wave propagation speed, however, the wake at the bow begins to build up faster than it can dissipate, and so it grows inamplitude. Since the water is not able to "get out of the way of the hull fast enough", the hull, in essence, has to climb over or push through the bow wave. This results in anexponentialincrease in resistance with increasing speed.
Thishull speedis found by the formula:
or, inmetricunits:
whereLis the length of the waterline in feet or meters.
When the vessel exceeds a speed/length ratio of 0.94, it starts to outrun most of itsbow wave, and the hull actually settles slightly in the water as it is now only supported by two wave peaks. As the vessel exceeds a speed/length ratio of 1.34, the hull speed, the wavelength is now longer than the hull, and the stern is no longer supported by the wake, causing the stern to squat, and the bow rise. The hull is now starting to climb its own bow wave, and resistance begins to increase at a very high rate. While it is possible to drive a displacement hull faster than a speed/length ratio of 1.34, it is prohibitively expensive to do so. Most large vessels operate at speed/length ratios well below that level, at speed/length ratios of under 1.0.
For large projects with adequate funding, hydrodynamic resistance can be tested experimentally in a hull testing pool or using tools ofcomputational fluid dynamics.
Vessels are also subject toocean surface wavesandsea swellas well as effects ofwindandweather. These movements can be stressful for passengers and equipment, and must be controlled if possible. The rolling movement can be controlled, to an extent, by ballasting or by devices such asfin stabilizers. Pitching movement is more difficult to limit and can be dangerous if the bow submerges in the waves, a phenomenon called pounding. Sometimes, ships must change course or speed to stop violent rolling or pitching.

## Lifecycle
A ship will pass through several stages during its career. The first is usually an initial contract to build the ship, the details of which can vary widely based on relationships between theshipowners, operators,designersand theshipyard. Then, the design phase carried out by a naval architect. Then the ship is constructed in a shipyard. After construction, the vessel is launched and goes into service. Ships end their careers in a number of ways, ranging fromshipwrecksto service as amuseum shiptothe scrapyard.

## Design
A vessel's design starts with a specification, which anaval architectuses to create a project outline, assess required dimensions, and create a basic layout of spaces and a rough displacement. After this initial rough draft, the architect can create an initial hull design, a general profile and an initial overview of the ship's propulsion. At this stage, the designer can iterate on the ship's design, adding detail and refining the design at each stage.
The designer will typically produce an overall plan, a general specification describing the peculiarities of the vessel, and construction blueprints to be used at the building site. Designs for larger or more complex vessels may also include sail plans, electrical schematics, and plumbing and ventilation plans.
As environmental laws are becoming more strict, ship designers need to create their design in such a way that the ship, when it nears its end-of-term, can bedisassembledordisposedeasily and that waste is reduced to a minimum.

## Construction
Ship construction takes place in ashipyard, and can last from a few months for a unit produced in series, to several years to reconstruct a wooden boat like the frigateHermione, to more than 10 years for an aircraft carrier. DuringWorld War II, the need for cargo ships was so urgent that construction time forLiberty Shipswent from initially eight months or longer, down to weeks or even days. Builders employed production line and prefabrication techniques such as those used in shipyards today.[100][101][102]
Hull materials and vessel size play a large part in determining the method of construction. The hull of a mass-produced fiberglass sailboat is constructed from a mold, while the steel hull of a cargo ship is made from large sections welded together as they are built.
Generally, construction starts with the hull, and on vessels over about 30 meters (98 ft), by the laying of the keel. This is done in adrydockor on land. Once the hull is assembled and painted, it is launched. The last stages, such as raising the superstructure and adding equipment and accommodation, can be done after the vessel is afloat.
Once completed, the vessel is delivered to the customer.Ship launchingis often a ceremony of some significance, and is usually when the vessel is formally named. A typical small rowboat can cost under US$100, $1,000 for a small speedboat, tens of thousands of dollars for a cruising sailboat, and about $2,000,000 for aVendée Globeclass sailboat. A 25 meters (82 ft) trawler may cost $2.5 million, and a 1,000-person-capacity high-speed passenger ferry can cost in the neighborhood of $50 million. A ship's cost partly depends on its complexity: a small,general cargo shipwill cost $20 million, aPanamax-sizedbulk carrieraround $35 million, asupertankeraround $105 million and a largeLNG carriernearly $200 million. The most expensive ships generally are so because of the cost of embedded electronics: aSeawolf-classsubmarinecosts around $2 billion, and an aircraft carrier goes for about $3.5 billion.
In 2023, the majority of the world's ships (95% of global output) were built in just three countries:China,South KoreaandJapan.[2]

## Repair and conversion
Ships undergo nearly constant maintenance during their career, whether they be underway, pierside, or in some cases, in periods of reduced operating status between charters or shipping seasons.
Most ships, however, require trips to special facilities such as adrydockat regular intervals. Tasks often done at drydock include removing biological growths on the hull,sandblastingand repainting the hull, and replacingsacrificial anodesused to protect submerged equipment from corrosion. Major repairs to the propulsion and steering systems as well as major electrical systems are also often performed at dry dock.
Some vessels that sustain major damage at sea may be repaired at a facility equipped for major repairs, such as a shipyard. Ships may also be converted for a new purpose:oil tankersare often converted intofloating production storage and offloading units.

## End of service
Most ocean-going cargo ships have a life expectancy of between 20 and 30 years. A sailboat made of plywood or fiberglass can last between 30 and 40 years. Solid wooden ships can last much longer but require regular maintenance. Carefully maintained steel-hulled yachts can have a lifespan of over 100 years.
As ships age, forces such as corrosion, osmosis, and rotting compromise hull strength, and a vessel becomes too dangerous to sail. At this point, it can bescuttledat sea orscrappedbyshipbreakers. Ships can also be used asmuseum ships, or expended to constructbreakwatersorartificial reefs.
Many ships do not make it to the scrapyard, and are lost in fires, collisions,grounding, or sinking at sea. The Allies lost some 5,150 ships duringWorld War II.[103]

## Measuring ships
One canmeasure shipsin terms oflength overall,length between perpendiculars,length of the ship at the waterline,beam (breadth), depth (distance between the crown of the weather deck and the top of the keelson),draft(distance between the highest waterline and the bottom of the ship) andtonnage. A number of different tonnage definitions exist and are used when describing merchant ships for the purpose of tolls, taxation, etc.
In Britain untilSamuel Plimsoll'sMerchant Shipping Act of 1876, ship-owners could load their vessels until their decks were almost awash, resulting in a dangerously unstable condition. Anyone who signed on to such a ship for a voyage and, upon realizing the danger, chose to leave the ship, could end up injail. Plimsoll, aMember of Parliament, realised the problem and engaged someengineersto derive a fairly simpleformulato determine the position of a line on the side of any specific ship's hull which, when it reached the surface of the water during loading of cargo, meant the ship had reached its maximum safe loading level. To this day, that mark, called the "Plimsoll mark", "freeboard mark" or "load line mark",[104]exists on ships' sides, and consists of acirclewith a horizontal line through the centre. On theGreat Lakes of North Americathe circle is replaced with a diamond. Because different types of water (summer, fresh, tropical fresh, winter north Atlantic) have different densities, subsequent regulations required painting a group of lines forward of the Plimsoll mark to indicate the safe depth (or freeboard above the surface) to which a specific ship could load in water of various densities. Hence the "ladder" of lines seen forward of the Plimsoll mark to this day. These are called the "load lines"[105]in themarine industry.

## Ship pollution
Shippollutionis the pollution of air and water byshipping. It is a problem that has been accelerating as trade has become increasingly globalized, posing an increasing threat to the world's oceans and waterways asglobalizationcontinues. It is expected that "shipping traffic to and from the United States is projected to double by 2020."[106]Because of increased traffic in oceanports, pollution from ships also directly affects coastal areas. The pollution produced affectsbiodiversity, climate, food, and human health. However, the degree to which humans are polluting and how it affects the world is highly debated and has been a hot international topic for the past 30 years.

## Oil spills
Oil spills have devastating effects on the environment. Crude oil containspolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons(PAHs) which are very difficult to clean up, and last for years in thesedimentand marine environment.[108]Marine species constantly exposed to PAHs can exhibit developmental problems, susceptibility to disease, and abnormal reproductive cycles.
By the sheer amount of oil carried, modern oil tankers must be considered something of a threat to the environment. An oil tanker can carry 2 million barrels (318,000 m3) of crude oil, or 84,000,000 US gallons (69,940,000 imp gal; 318,000,000 L). This is more than six times the amount spilled in the widely knownExxon Valdezincident. In this spill, the ship ran aground and dumped 10,800,000 US gallons (8,993,000 imp gal; 40,880,000 L) of oil into the ocean in March 1989. Despite efforts of scientists, managers, and volunteers, over 400,000seabirds, about 1,000sea otters, and immense numbers of fish were killed.[108]
The International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation has researched 9,351 accidental spills since 1974.[109]According to this study, most spills result from routine operations such as loading cargo, discharging cargo, and taking on fuel oil.[109]91% of the operational oil spills were small, resulting in less than 7 tons per spill.[109]Spills resulting from accidents like collisions, groundings, hull failures, and explosions are much larger, with 84% of these involving losses of over 700 tons.[109]
Following theExxon Valdezspill, the United States passed theOil Pollution Act of 1990(OPA-90), which included a stipulation that all tankers entering its waters bedouble-hulledby 2015. Following the sinkings ofErika(1999) andPrestige(2002), theEuropean Unionpassed its own stringent anti-pollution packages (known as Erika I, II, and III), which require all tankers entering its waters to be double-hulled by 2010. The Erika packages are controversial because they introduced the new legal concept of "serious negligence".[110]

## Ballast water
When a large vessel such as acontainer shipor an oil tanker unloads cargo, seawater is pumped into other compartments in the hull to help stabilize and balance the ship. During loading, this ballast water is pumped out from these compartments.[111]
One of the problems with ballast water transfer is the transport of harmful organisms. Meinesz[112]believes that one of the worst cases of a single invasive species causing harm to an ecosystem can be attributed to a seemingly harmlessplanktonicorganism .Mnemiopsis leidyi, a species ofcomb jellythat inhabits estuaries from the United States to the Valdés peninsula inArgentinaalong theAtlanticcoast, has caused notable damage in theBlack Sea. It was first introduced in 1982, and thought to have been transported to the Black Sea in a ship's ballast water. The population of the comb jelly shot up exponentially and, by 1988, it was wreaking havoc upon the localfishingindustry. "Theanchovycatch fell from 204,000tonnes(225,000short tons; 201,000long tons) in 1984 to 200 tonnes (220 short tons; 197 long tons) in 1993; sprat from 24,600 tonnes (27,100 short tons; 24,200 long tons) in 1984 to 12,000 tonnes (13,200 short tons; 11,800 long tons) in 1993;horse mackerelfrom 4,000 tonnes (4,410 short tons; 3,940 long tons) in 1984 to zero in 1993."[112]Now that the comb jellies have exhausted thezooplankton, including fish larvae, their numbers have fallen dramatically, yet they continue to maintain a stranglehold on theecosystem. Recently the comb jellies have been discovered in theCaspian Sea. Invasive species can take over once occupied areas, facilitate the spread of newdiseases, introduce newgeneticmaterial, alter landscapes and jeopardize the ability of native species to obtain food. "On land and in the sea, invasive species are responsible for about 137 billion dollars in lost revenue and management costs in the U.S. each year."[108]
Ballast andbilgedischarge from ships can also spread humanpathogensand other harmful diseases andtoxinspotentially causing health issues for humans and marine life alike.[113]Discharges into coastal waters, along with other sources of marine pollution, have the potential to be toxic to marine plants, animals, andmicroorganisms, causing alterations such as changes in growth, disruption ofhormonecycles, birth defects, suppression of theimmune system, and disorders resulting incancer,tumors, and genetic abnormalities or even death.[108]

## Exhaust emissions
Exhaustemissions from ships are considered to be a significant source ofair pollution. "Seagoing vessels are responsible for an estimated 14 percent of emissions of nitrogen from fossil fuels and 16 percent of the emissions of sulfur from petroleum uses into the atmosphere."[108]In Europe ships make up a large percentage of the sulfur introduced to the air, "as much sulfur as all the cars,lorriesand factories in Europe put together".[114]"By 2010, up to 40% of air pollution over land could come from ships."[114]Sulfur in the air createsacid rainwhich damages crops and buildings. When inhaled, sulfur is known to causerespiratoryproblems and increase the risk of aheart attack.[114]

## Ship breaking
Ship breakingorship demolitionis a type ofship disposalinvolving the breaking up of ships forscraprecycling, with the hulls being discarded inship graveyards. Most ships have a lifespan of a few decades before there is so much wear that refitting and repair becomes uneconomical. Ship breaking allows materials from the ship, especially steel, to be reused.
In addition to steel and other useful materials, however, ships (particularly older vessels) can contain many substances that are banned or considered dangerous indeveloped countries.Asbestosandpolychlorinated biphenyls(PCBs) are typical examples. Asbestos was used heavily in ship construction until it was finally banned in most of the developed world in the mid-1980s. Currently, the costs associated with removing asbestos, along with the potentially expensive insurance and health risks, have meant that ship-breaking in most developed countries is no longer economically viable. Removing the metal for scrap can potentially cost more than the scrap value of the metal itself. In most of the developing world, however, shipyards can operate without the risk ofpersonal injury lawsuitsorworkers' health claims, meaning many of these shipyards may operate with high health risks. Furthermore, workers are paid very low rates with no overtime or other allowances. Protective equipment is sometimes absent or inadequate. Dangerous vapors and fumes from burning materials can be inhaled, and dusty asbestos-laden areas around such breakdown locations are commonplace.
Aside from the health of the yard workers, in recent years, ship breaking has also become an issue of majorenvironmental concern. Many developing nations, in which ship breaking yards are located, have lax or noenvironmental law, enabling large quantities of highly toxic materials to escape into the environment and causing serious health problems among ship breakers, the local population and wildlife. Environmental campaign groups such asGreenpeacehave made the issue a high priority for their campaigns.[115]

## See also
Model ships
Lists
Ship sizes