## Sign language
Sign languages(also known assigned languages) arelanguagesthat use the visual-manual modality to convey meaning, instead of spoken words. Sign languages are expressed through manual articulation in combination withnon-manual markers. Sign languages are full-fledgednatural languageswith their own grammar and lexicon.[1]Sign languages are not universal and are usually notmutually intelligible,[2]although there are similarities among different sign languages.
Wherever communities of people with hearing challenges or people who experiencedeafnessexist, sign languages have developed as useful means of communication and form the core of localdeaf cultures. Although signing is used primarily by the deaf andhard of hearing, it is also used by hearing individuals, such as those with deaf family members includingchildren of deaf adults.
Sign language should not be confused withbody language, a type ofnonverbal communication. Linguists also distinguish natural sign languages from other systems that are precursors to them or obtained from them, such as constructed manual codes for spoken languages,home sign, "baby sign", and signs learned by non-human primates.
The number of sign languages worldwide is not precisely known. Each country generally has its own native sign language and some have more than one. The 2021 edition ofEthnologuelists 150 sign languages,[3]while the SIGN-HUB Atlas of Sign Language Structures lists over 200 and notes that there are more that have not been documented or discovered yet.[4]As of 2021,Indo-Pakistani Sign Languageis the most-used sign language in the world, andEthnologueranks it as the 151st most "spoken" language in the world.[5]
Some sign languages have obtained some form oflegal recognition.[6]

## History
Groups of deaf people have used sign languages throughout history. One of the earliest written records of a sign language is from the fifth century BC, inPlato'sCratylus, whereSocratessays: "If we hadn't a voice or a tongue, and wanted to express things to one another, wouldn't we try to make signs by moving our hands, head, and the rest of our body, just as dumb people do at present?"[7]Most of what is known about pre-19th-century sign languages is limited to the manual alphabets (fingerspelling systems) that were invented to facilitate the transfer of words from a spoken language to a sign language, rather than documentation of the language itself.
Debate around Europeanmonastic sign languagesdeveloped in the Middle Ages has come to regard them as gestural systems rather than true sign languages.[8]Monastic sign languages were the basis for the first known manual alphabet used in deaf schools, developed byPedro Ponce de León.[9]
The earliest records of contact between Europeans and Indigenous peoples of the Gulf Coast region in what is now Texas and northern Mexico note a fully formed sign language already in use by the time of the Europeans' arrival there.[10]These records include the accounts ofCabeza de Vacain 1527 andCoronadoin 1541.
In 1620,Juan Pablo BonetpublishedReducción de las letras y arte para enseñar a hablar a los mudos('Reduction of letters and art for teaching mute people to speak') in Madrid.[11]It is considered the first modern treatise of sign language phonetics, setting out a method of oral education for deaf people and a manual alphabet.
In Britain, manual alphabets were also in use for a number of purposes, such as secret communication,[12]public speaking, or communication by or with deaf people.[13]In 1648,John Bulwerdescribed "Master Babington", a deaf man proficient in the use of a manual alphabet, "contryved on the joynts of his fingers", whose wife could converse with him easily, even in the dark through the use oftactile signing.[14]
In 1680,George DalgarnopublishedDidascalocophus, or, The deaf and dumb mans tutor,[15]in which he presented his own method of deaf education, including an "arthrological" alphabet, where letters are indicated by pointing to different joints of the fingers and palm of the left hand. Arthrological systems had been in use by hearing people for some time;[16]some have speculated that they can be traced to earlyOghammanual alphabets.[17][18]
Thevowelsof this alphabet have survived in the modern alphabets used inBritish Sign Language,AuslanandNew Zealand Sign Language. The earliest known printed pictures of consonants of the moderntwo-handed alphabetappeared in 1698 withDigiti Lingua(Latin forLanguage[orTongue]of the Finger), a pamphlet by an anonymous author who was himself unable to speak.[19][20]He suggested that the manual alphabet could also be used by mutes, for silence and secrecy, or purely for entertainment. Nine of its letters can be traced to earlier alphabets, and 17 letters of the modern two-handed alphabet can be found among the two sets of 26 handshapes depicted.
Charles de La Finpublished a book in 1692 describing an alphabetic system where pointing to a body part represented the first letter of the part (e.g. Brow=B), and vowels were located on the fingertips as with the other British systems.[21]He described such codes for both English and Latin.
By 1720, the British manual alphabet had found more or less its present form.[22]Descendants of this alphabet have been used by deaf communities, at least in education, in the former British colonies India, Australia, New Zealand, Uganda and South Africa, as well as the republics and provinces of the former Yugoslavia, Grand Cayman Island in the Caribbean, Indonesia, Norway, Germany and the United States.
During thePolygar Warsagainst the British,Veeran Sundaralingamcommunicated withVeerapandiya Kattabomman's mute younger brother,Oomaithurai, by using their own sign language.[clarification needed]
FrenchmanCharles-Michel de l'Épéepublished his manual alphabet in the 18th century, which has survived largely unchanged in France and North America until the present time. In 1755, Abbé de l'Épée founded the first school for deaf children in Paris;Laurent Clercwas arguably its most famous graduate. Clerc went to the United States withThomas Hopkins Gallaudetto found theAmerican School for the Deafin Hartford, Connecticut, in 1817.[23][24]Gallaudet's son,Edward Miner Gallaudet, founded a school for the deaf in 1857 in Washington, D.C., which in 1864 became the National Deaf-Mute College. Now calledGallaudet University, it is still the only liberal arts university for deaf people in the world.
International Sign, formerly known as Gestuno, is used mainly at international deaf events such as theDeaflympicsand meetings of theWorld Federation of the Deaf. While recent studies claim that International Sign is a kind of apidgin, they conclude that it is more complex than a typical pidgin and indeed is more like a full sign language.[25][26]

## Linguistics
Sign languages have capability and complexity equal to spoken languages; their study as part of the field oflinguisticshas demonstrated that they exhibit the fundamental properties that exist in all languages.[27][1][28]Such fundamental properties includeduality of patterning[29]andrecursion.[30]Duality of patterning means that languages are composed of smaller, meaningless units which can be combined into larger units with meaning (see below). The term recursion means that languages exhibit grammatical rules and the output of such a rule can be the input of the same rule. It is, for example, possible in sign languages to createsubordinate clausesand a subordinate clause may contain another subordinate clause.
Sign languages are notmime—in other words, signs are conventional, often arbitrary and do not necessarily have a visual relationship to their referent, much as most spoken language is notonomatopoeic. Whileiconicityis more systematic and widespread in sign languages than in spoken ones, the difference is not categorical.[31][32]The visual modality allows the human preference for close connections between form and meaning,  to be more fully expressive, where as this is more suppressed  in spoken language.[33]
Sign languages, like spoken languages, organize elementary, meaningless units into meaningfulsemanticunits. This type of organization in natural language is often calledduality of patterning. As in spoken languages, these meaningless units are represented as (combinations of)features, although coarser descriptions are often also made in terms of five "parameters":handshape(orhandform),orientation,location(orplace of articulation),movement, and non-manualexpression. These meaningless units in sign languages were initially calledcheremes,[34]from the Greek word forhand, by analogy to thephonemes, from Greek forvoice, of spoken languages. Now they are sometimes called phonemes when describing sign languages too, since the function is essentially the same, but more commonly discussed in terms of "features"[1]or "parameters".[35]More generally, both sign and spoken languages share thecharacteristicsthat linguists have found in all natural human languages, such as transitoriness,semanticity,arbitrariness,productivity, andcultural transmission.[clarification needed]
Common linguistic features of many sign languages are the occurrence ofclassifier constructions, a high degree ofinflectionby means of changes of movement, and atopic-commentsyntax. More than spoken languages, sign languages can convey meaning by simultaneous means, e.g. by the use ofspace, two manual articulators, and the signer's face and body. Though there is still much discussion on the topic of iconicity in sign languages, classifiers are generally considered to be highly iconic, as these complex constructions "function as predicates that may express any or all of the following: motion, position, stative-descriptive, or handling information".[36]The term classifier is not used by everyone working on these constructions. Across the field of sign language linguistics the same constructions are also referred with other terms such as depictive signs.[citation needed]
Today, linguists study sign languages as true languages, part of the field of linguistics. However, the category "sign languages" was not added to theLinguistic Bibliography/Bibliographie Linguistiqueuntil the 1988 volume,[37]when it appeared with 39 entries.

## Relationships with spoken languages
There is a common misconception[38]that sign languages arespoken language expressed in signs, or that they were invented by hearing people.[39]Similarities inlanguage processing in the brainbetween signed and spoken languages further perpetuated this misconception. Hearing teachers in deaf schools, such as Charles-Michel de l'Épée or Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet, are often incorrectly referred to as "inventors" of sign language. Instead, sign languages, like all natural languages, are developed by the people who use them, in this case, deaf people, who may have little or no knowledge of any spoken language.
As a sign language develops, it sometimes borrows elements from spoken languages, just as all languages borrow from other languages that they are in contact with. Sign languages vary in how much they borrow from spoken languages. In many sign languages, a manual alphabet ("fingerspelling") may be used in signed communication to borrow a word from a spoken language. This is most commonly used for proper names of people and places; it is also used in some languages for concepts for which no sign is available at that moment, particularly if the people involved are to some extent bilingual in the spoken language. Fingerspelling can sometimes be a source of new signs, such as initialized signs, in which the handshape represents the first letter of a spoken word with the same meaning.
On the whole, though, sign languages are independent of spoken languages and follow their own paths of development. For example,British Sign Language(BSL) andAmerican Sign Language(ASL) are quite different and mutually unintelligible, even though the hearing people of the United Kingdom and the United States share the same spoken language. The grammars of sign languages do not usually resemble those of spoken languages used in the same geographical area; in fact, in terms of syntax, ASL shares more with spokenJapanesethan it does with English.[40]
Similarly, countries which use a single spoken language throughout may have two or more sign languages, or an area that contains more than one spoken language might use only one sign language.South Africa, which has 11 official spoken languages and a similar number of other widely used spoken languages, is a good example of this. It has only one sign language with two variants due to its history of having two major educational institutions for the deaf which have served different geographic areas of the country.

## Spatial grammar and simultaneity
Sign languages exploit the unique features of the visual medium (sight), but may also exploit tactile features (tactile sign languages). Spoken language is by and large linear; only one sound can be made or received at a time. Sign language, on the other hand, is visual and, hence, can use a simultaneous expression, although this is limited articulatorily and linguistically. Visual perception allows processing of simultaneous information.
One way in which many sign languages take advantage of the spatial nature of the language is through the use of classifiers.Classifiersallow a signer to spatially show a referent's type, size, shape, movement, or extent.
The possible simultaneity of sign languages in contrast to spoken languages is sometimes exaggerated. The use of two manual articulators is subject to motor constraints, resulting in a large extent of symmetry[41]or signing with one articulator only. Further, sign languages, just like spoken languages, depend on linear sequencing of signs to form sentences; the greater use of simultaneity is mostly seen in themorphology(internal structure of individual signs).

## Non-manual elements
Sign languages convey much of theirprosodythrough non-manual elements. Postures or movements of the body, head, eyebrows, eyes, cheeks, and mouth are used in various combinations to show several categories of information, includinglexicaldistinction,grammaticalstructure,adjectivaloradverbialcontent, anddiscoursefunctions.
At the lexical level, signs can be lexically specified for non-manual elements in addition to the manual articulation. For instance, facial expressions may accompany verbs of emotion, as in the sign forangryinCzech Sign Language. Non-manual elements may also be lexically contrastive. For example, in ASL (American Sign Language), facial components distinguish some signs from other signs. An example is the sign translated asnot yet, which requires that the tongue touch the lower lip and that the head rotate from side to side, in addition to the manual part of the sign. Without these features the sign would be interpreted aslate.[42]Mouthings, which are (parts of) spoken words accompanying lexical signs, can also be contrastive, as in the manually identical signs fordoctorandbatteryinSign Language of the Netherlands.[43]
While the content of a signed sentence is produced manually, many grammatical functions are produced non-manually (i.e., with the face and the torso).[44]Such functions include questions, negation, relative clauses and topicalization.[45]ASL and BSL use similar non-manual marking for yes/no questions, for example. They are shown through raised eyebrows and a forward head tilt.[46][47]
Some adjectival and adverbial information is conveyed through non-manual elements, but what these elements are varies from language to language. For instance, in ASL a slightly open mouth with the tongue relaxed and visible in the corner of the mouth means "carelessly", but a similar non-manual in BSL means "boring" or "unpleasant".[47]
Discourse functions such asturn takingare largely regulated through head movement and eye gaze. Since the addressee in a signed conversation must be watching the signer, a signer can avoid letting the other person have a turn by not looking at them, or can indicate that the other person may have a turn by making eye contact.[48]

## Iconicity
Iconicityis similarity or analogy between the form of a sign (linguistic or otherwise) and its meaning, as opposed toarbitrariness.[49]The first studies on iconicity in ASL were published in the late 1970s and early 1980s.  Many early sign language linguists rejected the notion that iconicity was an important aspect of sign languages, considering most perceived iconicity to be extralinguistic.[50][27]However, mimetic aspects of sign language (signs that imitate, mimic, or represent) are found in abundance across a wide variety of sign languages. For example, when deaf children learning sign language try to express something but do not know the associated sign, they will often invent an iconic sign that displays mimetic properties.[51]Though it never disappears from a particular sign language, iconicity is gradually weakened as forms of sign languages become more customary and are subsequently grammaticized. As a form becomes more conventional, it becomes disseminated in a methodical way phonologically to the rest of the sign language community.[52]Nancy Frishbergconcluded that though originally present in many signs, iconicity is degraded over time through the application of natural grammatical processes.[50]
In 1978, psychologistRoger Brownwas one of the first to suggest that the properties of ASL give it a clear advantage in terms of learning and memory.[53]In his study, Brown found that when a group of six hearing children were taught signs that had high levels of iconic mapping they were significantly more likely to recall the signs in a later memory task than another group of six children that were taught signs that had little or no iconic properties. In contrast to Brown, linguistsElissa Newportand Richard Meier found that iconicity "appears to have virtually no impact on the acquisition of American Sign Language".[54]
A central task for the pioneers of sign language linguistics was trying to prove that ASL was a real language and not merely a collection of gestures or "English on the hands".[citation needed]One of the prevailing beliefs at this time was that "real languages" must consist of an arbitrary relationship between form and meaning.[32]Thus, if ASL consisted of signs that had iconic form-meaning relationship, it could not be considered a real language. As a result, iconicity as a whole was largely neglected in research of sign languages for a long time. However, iconicity also plays a role in many spoken languages. SpokenJapanesefor example exhibits many words mimicking the sounds of their potential referents (seeJapanese sound symbolism). Later researchers, thus, acknowledged that natural languages do not need to consist of an arbitrary relationship between form and meaning.[55]The visual nature of sign language simply allows for a greater degree of iconicity compared to spoken languages as most real-world objects can be described by a prototypical shape (e.g., a table usually has a flat surface), but most real-world objects do not make prototypical sounds that can be mimicked by spoken languages (e.g., tables do not make prototypical sounds). However, sign languages are not fully iconic. On the one hand, there are also many arbitrary signs in sign languages and, on the other hand, the grammar of a sign language puts limits to the degree of iconicity: All known sign languages, for example, express lexical concepts via manual signs. From a truly iconic language one would expect that a concept like smiling would be expressed by mimicking a smile (i.e., by performing a smiling face). All known sign languages, however, do not express the concept of smiling by a smiling face, but by a manual sign.[56]
Thecognitive linguisticsperspective rejects a more traditional definition of iconicity as a relationship between linguistic form and a concrete, real-world referent. Rather it is a set of selected correspondences between the form and meaning of a sign.[33]In this view, iconicity is grounded in a language user's mental representation ("construal" incognitive grammar). It is defined as a fully grammatical and central aspect of a sign language rather than a peripheral phenomenon.[57]
The cognitive linguistics perspective allows for some signs to be fully iconic or partially iconic given the number of correspondences between the possible parameters of form and meaning.[58]In this way, theIsraeli Sign Language(ISL) sign foraskhas parts of its form that are iconic ("movement away from the mouth" means "something coming from the mouth"), and parts that are arbitrary (the handshape, and the orientation).[59]
Many signs havemetaphoricmappings as well as iconic or metonymic ones. For these signs there are three-way correspondences between a form, a concrete source and an abstract target meaning. The ASL sign LEARN has this three-way correspondence. The abstract target meaning is "learning". The concrete source is putting objects into the head from books. The form is a grasping hand moving from an open palm to the forehead. The iconic correspondence is between form and concrete source. The metaphorical correspondence is between concrete source and abstract target meaning. Because the concrete source is connected to two correspondences linguistics refer to metaphorical signs as "double mapped".[33][58][59]

## Classification
Sign languages may be classified by how they arise.
In non-signing communities,home signis not a full language, but closer to apidgin. Home sign is amorphous and generally idiosyncratic to a particular family, where a deaf child does not have contact with other deaf children and is not educated in sign. Such systems are not generally passed on from one generation to the next. Where they are passed on,creolizationwould be expected to occur, resulting in a full language.  However, home sign may also be closer to full language in communities where the hearing population has a gestural mode of language; examples include variousAustralian Aboriginal sign languagesand gestural systems across West Africa, such asMofu-Gudurin Cameroon.
Avillage sign languageis a local indigenous language that typically arises over several generations in a relatively insular community with a high incidence of deafness, and is used both by the deaf and by a significant portion of the hearing community, who have deaf family and friends.[60]The most famous of these is probably the extinctMartha's Vineyard Sign Languageof the U.S., but there are also numerous village languages scattered throughout Africa, Asia, and America.
Deaf-community sign languages, on the other hand, arise where deaf people come together to form their own communities.[61]These include school sign, such asNicaraguan Sign Language, which develop in the student bodies of deaf schools which do not use sign as a language of instruction, as well as community languages such asBamako Sign Language, which arise where generally uneducated deaf people congregate in urban centers for employment. At first, Deaf-community sign languages are not generally known by the hearing population, in many cases not even by close family members. However, they may grow, in some cases becoming a language of instruction and receiving official recognition, as in the case of ASL.
Both contrast withspeech-taboolanguages such as the variousAboriginal Australian sign languages, which are developed by the hearing community and only used secondarily by the deaf. It is doubtful whether most of these are languages in their own right, rather than manual codes of spoken languages, though a few such asYolngu Sign Languageare independent of any particular spoken language. Hearing people may also develop sign to communicate with users of other languages, as inPlains Indian Sign Language; this was a contact signing system orpidginthat was evidently not used by deaf people in the Plains nations, though it presumably influenced home sign.
Language contactand creolization is common in the development of sign languages, making clear family classifications difficult– it is often unclear whether lexical similarity is due to borrowing or a common parent language, or whether there was one or several parent languages, such as several village languages merging into a Deaf-community language. Contact occurs between sign languages, between sign and spoken languages (contact sign, a kind of pidgin), and between sign languages andgestural systemsused by the broader community. For example,Adamorobe Sign Language, a village sign language of Ghana, may be related to the "gestural trade jargon used in the markets throughout West Africa", in vocabulary andareal featuresincluding prosody and phonetics.[62][63]
The only comprehensive classification along these lines going beyond a simple listing of languages dates back to 1991.[72]The classification is based on the 69 sign languages from the 1988 edition ofEthnologuethat were known at the time of the 1989 conference on sign languages in Montreal and 11 more languages the author added after the conference.[74]
In his classification, the author distinguishes between primary and auxiliary sign languages[77]as well as between single languages and names that are thought to refer to more than one language.[78]The prototype-A class of languages includes all those sign languages that seemingly cannot be derived from any other language.[75]Prototype-R languages are languages that are remotely modelled on a prototype-A language (in many cases thought to have been French Sign Language) by a process Kroeber (1940) called "stimulus diffusion".[76]The families ofBSL,DGS,JSL,LSF(and possiblyLSG) were the products ofcreolizationandrelexificationof prototype languages.[79]Creolization is seen as enriching overt morphology in sign languages, as compared to reducing overt morphology in spoken languages.[80]

## Typology
Sign languages vary in word-order typology. For example, Austrian Sign Language, Japanese Sign Language andIndo-Pakistani Sign LanguageareSubject-object-verbwhile ASL isSubject-verb-object. Influence from the surrounding spoken languages is plausible.
Sign languages tend to be incorporating classifier languages, where a classifier handshape representing the object is incorporated into those transitive verbs which allow such modification. For a similar group of intransitive verbs (especially motion verbs), it is the subject which is incorporated. Only in a very few sign languages (for instance Japanese Sign Language) are agents ever incorporated. In this way, since subjects of intransitives are treated similarly to objects of transitives, incorporation in sign languages can be said to follow an ergative pattern.
Brentari[81][82]classifies sign languages as a whole group determined by the medium of communication (visual instead of auditory) as one group with the features monosyllabic and polymorphemic. That means, that one syllable (i.e. one word, one sign) can express several morphemes, e.g., subject and object of a verb determine the direction of the verb's movement (inflection).
Another aspect of typology that has been studied in sign languages is their systems forcardinal numbers.[83]Typologically significant differences have been found between sign languages.

## Acquisition
Children who are exposed to a sign language from birth will acquire it, just as hearing children acquire their native spoken language.[84]Researchers at theMcGill Universityfound that American Sign Language users who acquired the language natively (from birth) performed better when asked to copy videos of ASL sentences than ASL users who acquired the language later in life. They also found that there are differences in the grammatical morphology of ASL sentences between the two groups, all suggesting that there is an important critical period in learning signed languages.[85]
The acquisition of non-manual features follows an interesting pattern: When a word that always has a particular non-manual feature associated with it (such as awh-questionword) is learned, the non-manual aspects are attached to the word but do not have the flexibility associated with adult use. At a certain point, the non-manual features are dropped and the word is produced with no facial expression. After a few months, the non-manuals reappear, this time being used the way adult signers would use them.[86]

## Written forms
Sign languages do not have a traditional or formal written form. Many deaf people do not see a need to write their own language.[87]
Several ways to represent sign languages in written form have been developed.
So far, there is no consensus regarding the written form of sign language. Maria Galea writes that SignWriting "is becoming widespread, uncontainable and untraceable. In the same way that works written in and about a well developed writing system such as the Latin script, the time has arrived where SW is so widespread, that it is impossible in the same way to list all works that have been produced using this writing system and that have been written about this writing system."[93]For example, in 2015 at theFederal University of Santa Catarina, João Paulo Ampessan wrote his linguistics master's dissertation in Brazilian Sign Language using Sutton SignWriting. In his dissertation, "The Writing of Grammatical Non-Manual Expressions in Sentences in LIBRAS Using the SignWriting System", Ampessan states that "the data indicate the need for [non-manual expressions] usage in writing sign language".[94]Except for SignWriting, none are widely used.[citation needed]

## Sign perception
For a native signer, signperceptioninfluences how the mind makes sense of their visual language experience. For example, a handshape may vary based on the other signs made before or after it, but these variations are arranged in perceptual categories during its development.  The mind detects handshape contrasts but groups similar handshapes together in one category.[95][96][97]Different handshapes are stored in other categories.  The mind ignores some of the similarities between different perceptual categories, at the same time preserving the visual information within each perceptual category of handshape variation.

## Deaf communities and Deaf culture
When deaf people constitute a relatively small proportion of the general population, deaf communities often develop that are distinct from the surrounding hearing community.[98]These deaf communities are very widespread in the world, associated especially with sign languages used in urban areas and throughout a nation, and the cultures they have developed are very rich.
One example of sign language variation in the deaf community isBlack ASL. This sign language was developed in the black deaf community as a variant during the American era of segregation and racism, where young black deaf students were forced to attend separate schools than their white deaf peers.[99]

## Use of sign languages in hearing communities
On occasion, where the prevalence of deaf people is high enough, a deaf sign language has been taken up by an entire local community, forming what is sometimes called a "village sign language"[100]or "shared signing community".[101]Typically this happens in small, tightly integrated communities with a closed gene pool. Famous examples include:
In such communities deaf people are generally well-integrated in the general community and not socially disadvantaged, so much so that it is difficult to speak of a separate "Deaf" community.[98]
ManyAustralian Aboriginal sign languagesarose in a context of extensive speech taboos, such as during mourning and initiation rites. They are or were especially highly developed among theWarlpiri,Warumungu,Dieri,Kaytetye,Arrernte, andWarlmanpa, and are based on their respective spoken languages.
A sign language arose among tribes ofAmerican Indiansin theGreat Plainsregion ofNorth America(seePlains Indian Sign Language) before European contact. It was used by hearing people to communicate among tribes with different spokenlanguages, as well as by deaf people. There are especially users today among theCrow,Cheyenne, andArapaho.
Sign language is also used as a form of alternative or augmentative communication by people who can hear but have difficulties using their voices to speak.[102]
Increasingly, hearing schools and universities are expressing interest in incorporating sign language. In the U.S., enrollment for ASL (American Sign Language) classes as part of students' choice of second language is on the rise.[103]In New Zealand, one year after the passing of NZSL Act 2006 in parliament, a NZSL curriculum was released for schools to take NZSL as an optional subject. The curriculum and teaching materials were designed to target intermediate schools from Years 7 to 10, (NZ Herald, 2007).

## Legal recognition
Some sign languages have obtained some form of legal recognition, while others have no status at all. Sarah Batterbury has argued that sign languages should be recognized and supported not merely as an accommodation for those with disabilities, but as the communication medium of language communities.[104]
Legal requirements covering sign language accessibility in media vary from country to country. In theUnited Kingdom, theBroadcasting Act 1996addressed the requirements for blind and deaf viewers,[105]but has since been replaced by theCommunications Act 2003.

## Interpretation
In order to facilitate communication between deaf and hearing people, sign language interpreters are often used.  Such activities involve considerable effort on the part of the interpreter, since sign languages are distinctnatural languageswith their ownsyntax, different from any spoken language.
The interpretation flow is normally between a sign language and a spoken language that are customarily used in the same country, such asFrench Sign Language(LSF) and spoken French in France,Spanish Sign Language(LSE) to spoken Spanish in Spain,British Sign Language(BSL) and spoken English in the U.K., andAmerican Sign Language(ASL) and spoken English in the U.S. and most of anglophone Canada (since BSL and ASL are distinct sign languages both used in English-speaking countries), etc. Sign language interpreters who can translate between signed and spoken languages that are not normally paired (such as between LSE and English), are also available, albeit less frequently.
Sign language is sometimes provided fortelevision programmesthat include speech. The signer usually appears in the bottom corner of the screen, with the programme beingbroadcastfull size or slightly shrunk away from that corner. Typically forpress conferencessuch as those given by theMayor of New York City, the signer appears to stage left or right of the public official to allow both the speaker and signer to be in frame at the same time. Live sign interpretation of important televised events is increasingly common but still an informal industry[106]In traditional analogue broadcasting, some programmes are repeated outside main viewing hours with a signer present.[107]Some emergingtelevisiontechnologies allow the viewer to turn the signer on and off in a similar manner tosubtitlesandclosed captioning.[107]

## Technology
One of the first demonstrations of the ability fortelecommunicationsto help sign language users communicate with each other occurred whenAT&T'svideophone(trademarked as the Picturephone) was introduced to the public at the1964 New York World's Fair– two deaf users were able to freely communicate with each other between the fair and another city.[108]However, video communication did not become widely available until sufficient bandwidth for the high volume of video data became available in the early 2000s.
The Internet now allows deaf people to talk via avideo link, either with a special-purposevideophonedesigned for use with sign language or with "off-the-shelf"video servicesdesigned for use with broadband and an ordinary computerwebcam.  Thespecial videophonesthat are designed for sign language communication may provide better quality than 'off-the-shelf' services and may use data compression methods specifically designed to maximize the intelligibility of sign languages. Some advanced equipment enables a person to remotely control the other person's video camera, in order to zoom in and out or to point the camera better to understand the signing.
Interpreters may be physically present with both parties to the conversation but, since the technological advancements in the early 2000s, provision of interpreters in remote locations has become available.  Invideo remote interpreting(VRI), the two clients (a sign language user and a hearing person who wish to communicate with each other) are in one location, and the interpreter is in another. The interpreter communicates with the sign language user via a video telecommunications link, and with the hearing person by an audio link. VRI can be used for situations in which no on-site interpreters are available.
However, VRI cannot be used for situations in which all parties are speaking via telephone alone. Withvideo relay service(VRS), the sign language user, the interpreter, and the hearing person are in three separate locations, thus allowing the two clients to talk to each other on the phone through the interpreter.
With recent developments inartificial intelligenceincomputer science, some recent deep learning basedmachine translation algorithmshave been developed which automatically translate short videos containing sign language directly to written language.[109]
Sign language has been incorporated intofilm; for example, all movies shown in Brazilian movie theaters must have aBrazilian Sign Languagevideo track available to play alongside the film via asecond screen.[110][111]

## Sign Union flag
The Sign Union flag was designed byArnaud Balard. After studying flags around the world andvexillologyprinciples for two years, Balard revealed the design of the flag, featuring the stylized outline of a hand. The three colors which make up the flag design are representative of Deafhood and humanity (dark blue), sign language (turquoise), and enlightenment and hope (yellow). Balard intended the flag to be an international symbol which welcomes deaf people.[112]

## Language endangerment and extinction
As with any spoken language, sign languages are also vulnerable to becomingendangered.[113]For example, a sign language used by a small community may be endangered and even abandoned as usersshiftto a sign language used by a larger community, as has happened withHawai'i Sign Language, which is almost extinct except for a few elderly signers.[114][115]Even nationally recognised sign languages can be endangered; for example, New Zealand Sign Language is losing users.[116]Methods are being developed to assess the language vitality of sign languages.[117]

## Communication systems similar to sign language
There are a number of communication systems that are similar in some respects to sign languages, while not having all the characteristics of a full sign language, particularly its grammatical structure. Many of these are either precursors to natural sign languages or are derived from them.

## Manual codes for spoken languages
When Deaf and Hearing people interact, signing systems may be developed that use signs drawn from a natural sign language but used according to the grammar of the spoken language. In particular, when people devise one-for-one sign-for-word correspondences between spoken words (or evenmorphemes) and signs that represent them, the system that results is a manual code for a spoken language, rather than a natural sign language. Such systems may be invented in an attempt to help teach Deaf children the spoken language, and generally are not used outside an educational context.

## "Baby sign language" with hearing children
Some hearing parents teach signs to young hearing children.  Since the muscles in babies' hands grow and develop quicker than their mouths, signs are seen as a beneficial option for better communication.[122]Babies can usually produce signs before they can speak.[citation needed][123]This reduces the confusion between parents when trying to figure out what their child wants. When the child begins to speak, signing is usually abandoned, so the child does not progress to acquiring the grammar of the sign language.[124]
This is in contrast to hearing children who grow up with Deaf parents, who generally acquire the full sign language natively, the same as Deaf children of Deaf parents.

## Home sign
Informal, rudimentary sign systems are sometimes developed within a single family. For instance, when hearing parents with no sign language skills have a deaf child, the child may develop a system of signs naturally, unless repressed by the parents. The term for these mini-languages ishome sign(sometimes "kitchen sign").[125]
Home sign arises due to the absence of any other way to communicate. Within the span of a single lifetime and without the support or feedback of a community, the child naturally invents signs to help meet his or her communication needs, and may even develop a few grammatical rules for combining short sequences of signs. Still, this kind of system is inadequate for the intellectual development of a child and it comes nowhere near meeting the standards linguists use to describe a complete language. No type of home sign is recognized as a full language.[126]

## Primate use
There have been several notable examples of scientists teaching signs to non-humanprimatesin order to communicate withhumans,[127]such aschimpanzees,[128][129][130][131][132][133][134]gorillas[135]andorangutans.[136]However, linguists generally point out that this does not constitute knowledge of a humanlanguageas a complete system, rather than simply signs/words.[137][138][139][140][141]Notable examples of animals who have learned signs include:

## Gestural theory of human language origins
One theory of the evolution of human language states that it developed first as a gestural system, which later shifted to speech.[142][143][144][145][63][146]An important question for this gestural theory is what caused the shift to vocalization.[147][148][149]

## External links
Note: the articles forspecific sign languages(e.g.ASLorBSL) may contain further external links, e.g. for learning those languages.