## Sport of athletics
Athleticsis a group ofsportingevents that involves competitiverunning,jumpingandthrowing.[2]The most common types of athletics competitions aretrack and field,road running,cross-country running, andrace walking.
The results ofracingevents are decided by finishing position (or time, where measured), while the jumps and throws are won by theathletethat achieves the highest or furthest measurement from a series of attempts. The simplicity of the competitions, and the lack of a need for expensive equipment, makes athletics one of the most common types of sports in the world. Athletics is mostly an individual sport, with the exception ofrelay racesand competitions which combine athletes' performances for a team score, such as cross country.
Organized athletics are traced back to theancient Olympic Gamesfrom 776 BC. The rules and format of the modernevents in athleticswere defined in Western Europe and North America in the 19th and early 20th century, and were then spread to other parts of the world. Most modern top level meetings are held under the auspices ofWorld Athletics, the global governing body for the sport of athletics, or its member continental and national federations.
The athletics meeting forms the backbone of theSummer Olympicsand most other majormulti-sport events. The foremost international athletics meeting is theWorld Athletics Championships, which incorporates track and field, marathon running and race walking. Other top level competitions in athletics include theWorld Athletics Indoor Championships,World Athletics Cross Country Championshipsand theWorld Athletics Road Running Championships. Athletes with aphysical disabilitycompete at theSummer Paralympicsand theWorld Para Athletics Championships.
The most prestigious global season-long leagues in the sport are theDiamond Leaguefor track and field athletes, and theWorld Marathon Majorsin marathon running.
The word athletics is derived from theAncient Greekἀθλητής(athlētēs, "combatant in public games") fromἆθλον(athlon, "prize") orἆθλος(athlos, "competition").[3]Initially, the term described athletic contests in general – i.e. sporting competition based primarily on human physical feats. In the 19th century, the term athletics acquired a more narrow definition in Europe and came to describe sports involving competitive running, walking, jumping and throwing. This definition continues to be prominent in the United Kingdom and the formerBritish Empire.  Related words inGermanicandRomance languagesalso have a similar meaning.
In many parts of North America, the term athletics is commonly used to refer to sports in general, reflecting its historical usage. As a result, the word is rarely used in this region to specifically describe the sport of athletics. Instead, the term track and field is predominantly used in the United States and Canada to refer to athletics competitions. These events include running, jumping, throwing, race walking, and marathon running, while cross-country running is generally considered a separate sport.

## Ancient
Athletic contests in running, walking, jumping and throwing are among the oldest of all sports and their roots areprehistoric.[4]Athletics events were depicted in theAncient Egyptiantombs inSaqqara, with illustrations ofrunningat theHeb Sed festivalandhigh jumpingappearing in tombs from as early as of 2250 BC.[5]TheTailteann Gameswere an ancientCelticfestival inIreland, foundedc.1800 BC, and the thirty-day meeting includedrunningandstone-throwingamong its sporting events.[6]The original and only event atthe first Olympicsin 776 BC was a stadium-lengthrunning eventknown as thestadion. This later expanded to include throwing and jumping events within theancient pentathlon. Athletics competitions also took place at otherPanhellenic Games, which were founded later around 500 BC.[7]

## Modern era
TheCotswold Olympic Games, a sports festival which emerged in 17th centuryEngland, featured athletics in the form ofsledgehammerthrowing contests.[8]Annually, from 1796 to 1798, L'Olympiade de la République was held inrevolutionary France, and is an early forerunner to the modern Olympic Games. The premier event of this competition was a running event, but various ancient Greek disciplines were also on display. The 1796 Olympiade marked the introduction of themetric systeminto the sport.[9]
Athletics competitions were held about 1812 at theRoyal Military College, Sandhurst,[10]and in 1840 at the RoyalShrewsbury SchoolHunt. TheRoyal Military Academy, Woolwichheld an organised competition in 1849, and a regular series of closed meetings open only to undergraduates, was held byExeter College, Oxford, from 1850.[11]The annualWenlock Olympian Games, first held in 1850 inWenlock, England, incorporated athletics events into its sports programme.[12]
The first modern athletics clubs in the world were founded at theUniversity of Cambridgein 1857,[13]and theUniversity of Oxfordin 1860;[14]they began an annualvarsity matchin 1864.[15]TheLondon Athletic Clubbecame the first independent athletic club in 1863.[16][17]The first modern-style indoor athletics meetings were recorded shortly after in the 1860s, including a meet at Ashburnham Hall in London which featured four running events and a triple jump competition.[18][19]
TheAmateur Athletic Association(AAA) was established in England in 1880 as the first national body for the sport of athletics and began holding its own annual athletics competition – theAAA Championships. TheUnited Statesalso began holding an annual national competition – theUSA Outdoor Track and Field Championships– first held in 1876 by theNew York Athletic Club.[20]Athletics became codified and standardized via the English AAA and other general sports organisations in the late 19th century, such as theAmateur Athletic Union(founded in the US in 1888) and theUnion des sociétés françaises de sports athlétiques(founded in France in 1889).
An athletics competition was included in the first modernOlympic Gamesin 1896 and it has been as one of the foremost competitions at the quadrennialmulti-sport eventever since. Originally for men only, the1928 Olympicssaw the introduction of women's events in the athletics programme. Athletics is part of theParalympic Gamessince the inaugural Games in1960. Athletics has a very high-profile during major championships, especially the Olympics, even among casual sports fans, but otherwise is less popular though it maintains a dedicate fan base. Big city marathons such asNew York,Boston,Chicago,LondonandTokyoare major televised events in their respective cities, and often attract thousands of entrants and tens of thousands of spectators, for whom the event is usually free as it takes place on normal city roads. A small number of half marathons and road mile races, including theGreat North Run, attract similar attention.
An international governing body, the International Amateur Athletics Federation (IAAF), was founded in 1912. It enforcedamateur sportstatus on competitions during much of the 20th century. Professional competition continued at a low level, becoming increasingly more common as the century progressed. TheInternational Track Associationbriefly formed a professional track and field circuit in the United States in the 1970s. Athletes used their increasing status to push for remuneration and the IAAF responded with theIAAF Golden Eventsseries and the establishment an outdoorWorld Championshipsin 1983, including track and field, racewalking and a marathon event. In modern times, athletes can receive money for racing, putting an end to the so-called "amateurism" that existed before. The global body updated the name to the International Association of Athletics Federations in 2001, moving away from its amateur origins,[21]before taking on its current nameWorld Athleticsin 2019.[22]
The Comité International Sports des Sourds had been formed by 1922, to govern international deaf sports, including athletics.[23]
The first organized international competitions for athletes with aphysical disability(not deaf) began in 1952, when the first internationalStoke Mandeville Gameswere organized for World War II veterans.[23][24]This only included athletes in awheelchair. This inspired the firstParalympic Games, held in 1960. Competitions would over time be expanded to include mainly athletes withamputation,cerebral palsyandvisual impairment, in addition to wheelchair events.

## Events
World Athletics, the sport's governing body, defines athletics in six disciplines:track and field,road running,race walking,cross country running,mountain running, andtrail running.[25]Mountain running was added in 2003 and trail running was added in 2015.[26][27][28][29]
All forms of athletics areindividual sportswith the exception ofrelay races. However, athletes' performances are often tallied together by country at international championships, and, in the case of cross country and road races, finishing positions or times of the top athletes from a team may be combined to declare a team victor.
Several further forms of competitive running exist outside of the governance of World Athletics. TheInternational Skyrunning Federation(ISF) governs high-altitude mountain running, defined asskyrunning, and is affiliated with theInternational Climbing and Mountaineering Federationrather than World Athletics.[30]Competitivestair climbingevents, usually hosted inskyscrapers, has two common names:vertical running(as described by the ISF) andtower running(as described by theTowerrunning World Association).[31][32]Snowshoe runningis awinter sportgoverned by theWorld Snowshoe Federation, which is similarly to cross country running but has athletes wearingsnowshoesto race over deep snow on an obstacle-free course.[33]TheInternational Association of Ultrarunnersorganisesultra runningas an affiliate of World Athletics, but these long-distance forms of competition fit within World Athletics disciplines, albeit with additional distance.[34]
Athletics, specifically the distance running discipline, also forms a significant portion of a number of other organised sports, most notable thetriathlonfamily of sports andmodern pentathlon. In both cases, the rules of the sport broadly mirror those of World Athletics, but the details are set by the international federation of the sports themselves.

## Track and field
Track and field competitions emerged in the late 19th century and were typically contested between athletes who were representing rivaleducational institutions,military organisationsandsports clubs.[35]Participating athletes may compete in one or more events, according to their specialities. Men and women compete separately. Track and field comes in both indoor and outdoor formats, with most indoor competitions occurring inwinter, while outdoor events are mostly held insummer. The sport is defined by the venue in which the competitions are held – theathletics stadium.
A variety ofrunningevents are held on the track which fall into three broad distance categories:sprints,middle-distance, andlong-distance track events. Relay races feature teams comprising four runners each, who must pass abatonto their teammate after a specified distance with the aim of being the first team to finish.Hurdlingevents and thesteeplechaseare a variation upon the flat running theme in that athletes must clear obstacles on the track during the race. The field events come in two types – jumping and throwing competitions. In throwing events, athletes are measured by how far they hurl an implement, with the common events being theshot put,discus,javelin, andhammer throw. There are four common jumping events: thelong jumpandtriple jumpare contests measuring the horizontal distance an athlete can jump, while thehigh jumpandpole vaultare decided on the height achieved.Combined events, which include thedecathlon(typically competed by men) andheptathlon(typically competed by women), are competitions where athletes compete in a number of different track and field events, with each performance going toward a final points tally.
The most prestigious track and field contests occur within athletics championships and athletics programmes atmulti-sport events. TheOlympic athletics competitionandWorld Championships in Athletics, and theParalympic athletics competitionandWorld Para Athletics Championships, are the highest and most prestigious levels of competition in track and field. Track and field events have become the most prominent part of major athletics championships and many famous athletes within the sport of athletics come from this discipline. Discrete track and field competitions are found atnational championships-level and also at annual, invitationaltrack and field meets. Meetings range from elite competitions – such as those in theIAAF Diamond Leagueseries – to basicall comers track meets, inter-sports club meetings and schools events, which form the grassroots of track and field.

## Road running
Road running competitions are running events (predominantly long distance) which are mainly conducted on courses ofpavedortarmacroads, although major events often finish on the track of a mainstadium. In addition to being a commonrecreational sport, the elite level of the sport – particularlymarathon races– are one of the most popular aspects of athletics. Road racing events can be of virtually any distance, but the most common and well known are themarathon,half marathon,10 kmand5 km. The marathon is the only road running event featured at theIAAF World Championships in Athleticsand theSummer Olympics, although there is also an annualIAAF World Half Marathon Championships. The marathon is also the only road running event featured at theWorld Para Athletics Championshipsand theSummer Paralympics. TheWorld Marathon Majorsseries includes the six most prestigious marathon competitions at the elite level – theBerlin,Boston,Chicago,London,New York CityandTokyo Marathons.
The sport of road running finds its roots in the activities offootmen: male servants who ran alongside the carriages ofaristocratsaround the 18th century, and who also ran errands over distances for their masters.Foot racingcompetitions evolved fromwagersbetween aristocrats, who pitted their footman against that of another aristocrat in order to determine a winner. The sport becameprofessionalisedas footmen were hired specifically on their athletic ability and began to devote their lives to training for the gambling events. Theamateur sportsmovement in the late 19th century marginalised competitions based on the professional, gambling model. The1896 Summer Olympicssaw the birth of the modern marathon and the event led to the growth of road running competitions through annual events such as the Boston Marathon (first held in 1897) and theLake Biwa MarathonandFukuoka Marathons, which were established in the 1940s. The1970s running boomin theUnited Statesmade road running a commonpastimeand also increased its popularity at the elite level.[36]
Ekidencontests – which originated inJapanand remain very popular there – are a relay race variation on the marathon, being in contrast to the typically individual sport of road running.

## Cross country running
Cross country running is the most naturalistic of the sports in athletics as competitions take place on open-air courses over surfaces such asgrass,woodlandtrails, andearth. It is both an individual andteam sport, as runners are judged on an individual basis and a points scoring method is used for teams. Competitions are typically long distance races of 3 km (1.9 mi) or more which are usually held in autumn and winter. Cross country's most successful athletes often compete in long-distance track and road events as well.
TheCrick RuninEnglandin 1838 was the first recorded instance of an organised cross country competition. The sport gained popularity in British, then American schools in the 19th century and culminated in the creation of the firstInternational Cross Country Championshipsin 1903.[37]The annualIAAF World Cross Country Championshipswas inaugurated in 1973 and this remains the highest level of competition for the sport. A number of continental cross country competitions are held, with championships taking place inAsia,Europe,North AmericaandSouth America. The sport has retained its status at the scholastic level, particularly in the United Kingdom and United States. At the professional level, the foremost competitions come under the banner of theIAAF Cross Country Permit Meetings.
While cross country competitions are no longer held at the Olympics, having featured in the athletics programme from 1912 to 1924, it has been present as one of the events within themodern pentathloncompetition since the1912 Summer Olympics. One variation on traditional cross country ismountain running, which incorporates significant uphill and downhill sections as an additional challenge to the course.Fell runningandOrienteeringare other competitive sports similar to cross country, although they feature an element ofnavigationwhich is absent from the set courses of cross country.

## Racewalking
Racewalking is a form of competitivewalkingthat usually takes place on open-air roads, although running tracks are also occasionally used. Racewalking is the only sport in athletics in which judges monitor athletes on their technique. Racewalkers must always have a foot in contact with the ground and their advancing leg must be straightened, not bent at the knee – failure to follow these rules results in disqualification from the race.[38]
Racewalking finds its roots in the sport ofpedestrianismwhich emerged in the late 18th century in England. Spectators would gamble on the outcome of the walking competitions. The sport took on an endurance aspect and competitions were held over long distances or walkers would have to achieve a certain distance within a specified time frame, such asCenturioncontests of walking 100 miles (160 km) within 24 hours.[38]During this period, racewalking was frequently held on athletics tracks for ease of measurement, and the1908 Summer OlympicsinLondonsaw the introduction of the 3500-metre and 10-mile walks. Racewalking was briefly dropped from the Olympic programme in1928, but the men's50 kilometres race walkhas been held at every Olympic Games but one since 1932. The men's20 kilometres race walkwas added to the Olympic athletics schedule in 1956 and the women's event was first held in 1992. The most common events in modern competition are over 10 km, 20 km and 50 km on roads, although women's 3 km and men's 5 km are held on indoor tracks.
The highest level racewalking competitions occur at the IAAF World Championships in Athletics and at the Summer Olympics, although the sport also has its own separate major competition – theIAAF World Race Walking Cup– which has been held since 1961. TheIAAF World Race Walking Challengeforms the primary seasonal competition – athletes earn points for their performances at ten selected racewalking competitions and the highest scoring walkers are entered into that year'sIAAF Race Walking Challenge Final.

## Categories
The significant variation in people's abilities in the sport of athletics has led to the creation of numerous competitive categories, in order that athletes are pitted against rivals of a similar kind or ability, and to include groups of people who would otherwise not be competitive in open-to-all events. The eligibility of athletes for a given category is occasionally a source of controversy among the sport's participants, officials and spectators, with disputes typically being rooted in deliberatecheatingin order to gain a competitive advantage or differing cultural perspectives over the eligibility of a category.
Beyond the primary categories based on physical attributes, some competitions have further eligibility criteria based on nationality, community membership or occupation.

## Men's and women's divisions
The foremost division of this kind is by sex: in athletics, men and women almost exclusively compete against people of the same sex. In contrast to the men's division, the development of the women's division has caused regular dispute in terms of eligibility. Severalintersexathletes had success in the women's division in the early 20th century, such asStanisława WalasiewiczandMary Weston(later Mark), and the IAAF responded by introducingsex verificationfor all athletes in the women's category, beginning with the disqualification of sprinterFoekje Dillemain 1950 after she refused to be tested.[39]Olympic championEwa Kłobukowskabecame the first athlete to publicly fail the test in 1967 and the humiliation she suffered as a result of the announcement led to sex tests becoming a confidential process.[40]HurdlerMaria José Martínez-Patiñofailed a test and was disqualified in 1985, but publicly fought the ban in court and was reinstated in 1988. In 1991, the IAAF replaced the sexchromatintest with general medical tests for athletes of all divisions, due to changes in ethical and scientific viewpoints.[41]
The question of eligibility for the women's division continued to be a contentious and public issue into the 21st century, withCaster SemenyaandDutee Chandbearing periods of ineligibility and taking the IAAF to theCourt of Arbitration for Sportover their bans under thehyperandrogenismrules.[42]An increasing number oftrans menandtrans womenbegan to compete in the women's division in the 2010s, which caused other athletes in the division to raise questions of fairness in competition.[43][44]
The dispute reached new heights in 2019 with theUnited Nations Human Rights Councilissuing a statement that the IAAF was breaching "international human rights norms and standards" through its practice of allowing some athletes to compete in the women's division only once they had lowered their testosterone levels through medical intervention.[45]The IAAF and several prominent women athletes, such asPaula Radcliffe, said this was required in order to prevent a situation where countries deliberately sought out athletes who were intersex, transgender or had adifference in sex developmentin order to succeed in women's sport.[46]Others have argued for the abolition of gender verification testing, with academic Maren Behrensen citing the harm to tested athletes' social and emotional well-being, the inaccuracy of the medical tests, the difficulty of determining the exact performance advantage provided by a given condition, and the moral risk of "gender-engineering" by setting a biological definition for a female athlete.[47]

## Age
Age is a significant determiner of ability to compete in athletics, with athletic ability generally increasing through childhood and adolescence, peaking in early adulthood, then gradually declining from around the age of 30 onwards.[48][49]As a result, numerous age categories have been created to encourage younger and older athletes to engage in competition. At international level, there are three major categories for young athletes:under-23,under-20(formerly junior), andunder-18(formerly youth). Beyond international rules, different youth categories are in use in the sport, often in the form of two-year or single age groupings.[50]Age categories are more extensive for older athletes and these are commonly organised under the umbrella ofmasters athletics, which has age groups spanning five years for all athletes aged 35 and above. There is no limit to the number of age groupings, henceStanisław Kowalskiholds a world record for men aged 105 years and over.[51]For competitions where age is not taken into account, this is known as senior oropen classathletics; in international rules there remain some restrictions on younger people competing in endurance events for health reasons .[50]
Athletes' eligibility for a competitive age grouping is typically assessed through official documentation, such as birth records or passports. Instances ofage cheatinghave occurred at all of the IAAF's global age category championships. One prominent incident was Olympic medalistThomas Longosiwa, who provided a falsified passport to compete at the2006 World Junior Championships in Athleticsat age 24.[52]Age falsification for youth categories is mostly limited to less developed parts of the world, such as Africa and South Asia, which have less stringent controls on official documentation and many mature athletes engaging in high school competition due to disruptions to education.[53][54][55][56]The same regions of the world also present issues with age verification in masters age categories, with examples such as Indian distance runnersDharampal Singh GudhaandFauja Singh(both claiming to be over 100 years old) reaching mainstream attention.[57]

## Athletes with disabilities
Athletes withphysical disabilitieshave competed at separate international events since 1952. TheInternational Paralympic Committeegoverns the competitions in athletics, and hosts theParalympic Games, which have continued since1960.[23][24]
Competitors at elite level competitions, are classified by disability, to arrange athletes with a similar disability in the same event. A classified T12 athlete for example, is a track athlete with a visual impairment.[58]
Operating independently of the Paralympic movement,deafathletes have a long-established tradition of organised athletics, with the first major world competition being included at the 1924Deaflympics.[59]The primary impediments to the inclusion of deaf athletes in mainstream athletics are sound based elements of the sport, such as thestarter's pistol. This can be a disadvantage even in Paralympic sport, as shown in by the example ofOlivia Breenwho failed to hear a false start in a cerebral palsy class race at the 2012 Paralympics.[60]
Inwheelchair racingathletes compete in lightweight racing chairs.  Most majormarathonshave wheelchair divisions and the elite racers consistently beat the runners on foot. The speed of wheel chair racers has caused difficulties for race organisers in properly staggering their start times compared to runners. A collision between Josh Cassidy (a wheelchair racer) and Tiki Gelana (a leading female marathoner) at the2013 London Marathonbrought the issue into the spotlight again.[61]
Occasionally, athletes with a disability reach a level at which they can compete against able-bodied athletes.  Legally blindMarla Runyanran in the 2000 and 2004 Olympics and won a gold medal in the 1500 metres at the1999 Pan American Games.Oscar Pistorius, a double amputee, was a semi-finalist at the2011 World Championshipsand won a silver medal as part of South Africa's4 × 400 metres relay team.[62]Inmasters athleticsit is far more common to make an accommodation for athletes with a disability.  BlindIvy Granstromset numerousMasters world recordswhile being guided around the track.[63]
The disability categories have caused dispute among athletes, with some athletes being accused of exaggerating their level of disability in order to compete in less challenging categories.[64]Athletes withintellectual disabilitieswere banned from competition in all Paralympic sports in response to verification issues andcheating at the 2000 Summer Paralympicsand the intellectual disability athletics programme was only restored twelve years later at the2012 Summer Paralympics.[65]

## Venues
Professional athletics almost exclusively takes place in one of three types of venue:stadiums, set courses on grass or woodland, and road-based courses. Such venues ensure that events take place in a relatively standardised manner, as well as improving the safety of athletes and enjoyment for spectators. At a more basic level, many forms of athletics demand very little in terms of venue requirements; almost any open space or area of field can provide a suitable venue for basic running, jumping and throwing competitions.

## Athletics stadium
A standard outdoor track is in the shape of astadium,[66]400 metres in length, and has at least eight lanes 1.22 m in width (small arenas might have six lanes). Older track facilities may have nonstandard track lengths, such as 440 yards (402.3 m; 1/4 mile) (common in the United States). Historically, tracks were covered by a dirt running surface. ModernAll-weather running tracksare covered by a synthetic weather-resistant running surface, which typically consists of rubber (either black SBR or colored EPDM granules), bound by polyurethane or latex resins. Older tracks may becinder-covered. The facilities can be called track and field stadiums or athletics stadiums.[67][68]
A standard indoor track is designed similarly to an outdoor track, but is only 200 metres in length and has between four and eight lanes, each with width between 0.90 m and 1.10 m.[69]Often, the bends of an indoor track will be banked to compensate for the small turning radius. However, because of space limitations, indoor tracks may have other nonstandard lengths, such as 160-yard (146.3 m) indoor track atMadison Square Gardenused for theMillrose Games. Because of space limitations, meetings held at indoor facilities do not hold many of athletics events typically contested outdoors.

## Cross country courses
There is no standardised form of cross country course and each venue is significantly defined by the environment it contains – some may be relatively flat and featureless, while others may be more challenging with natural obstacles, tight turns, and undulating ground. While a small number of purpose-built courses exist, the vast majority of cross country running courses are created by cordoning a specific area within any open natural land, typically apark,woodlandorgreenspacenear asettlement.[70]
At the elite and professional level, courses must be looped and each lap must be between 1750 m and 2000 m in length. Severe obstacles such as deep ditches, high barriers and thick undergrowth not normally present; the course should be able to be completed whilst remaining on foot throughout. In order to maintain the sport's distinction from road running, the usage of unnatural ormacadamisedsurfaces is generally kept to a minimum or avoided entirely.[70]
Because the majority of races take place on areas of grass, soil, mud or earth,weather conditionscan significantly affect the difficulty of cross country courses, assnowandrainreduces traction and can create areas of standing water.

## Road courses
The surface of road races is highly important and the IAAF dictate that the courses must be along man-made roads, bicycle paths or footpaths. Courses set along major roads of cities are typical of road running events, andtrafficis usually cordoned off from the area during the competition. While soft ground, such as grass, is generally avoided, races may start and finish on soft ground or within an athletics stadium. Road racing courses come in two primary types: looped and point-to-point. Courses may be measured and designed to cover a standardised distance, such as 10 km (6.2 mi), or they may simply follow a set route between two landmarks.[71]
Road running courses over 5 km usually offer drinks or refreshment stations for runners at designated points alongside the course and medical professionals are present at the courses of major races due to the health risks involved with long-distance running.[71]
Elite road walks are conducted on closed loop courses (usually loops of 2,000 or 2,500 meters). Refreshment stations are also present over long distance walking competitions, with drinks being available on every lap for races longer than 10 km.[72]

## Organizations
In 1912, the formation of theinternational governing bodyfor athletics, theInternational Amateur Athletics Federation, began. In recognition of the movement of the sport fromamateurismtowardsprofessionalismthat began in the late 1970s, the wordamateurwas dropped from the name, and the organization was rebranded as the International Association of Athletics Federations in 2001. In late 2019, another rebranding began, withWorld Athleticsas the new title of the governing body.
World Athletics has 215 member nations and territories, which are divided into six continental areas (or area associations).[73]The six association areas are forAsia,Africa,Europe,Oceania,North and Central America and CaribbeanandSouth America. The sports within athletics do not have their own independent governing bodies at either international or continental level; instead, all fall under the athletics authorities.[74][75]
National level athletics organisations are responsible for the regulation of the sport within their respective countries and most major competitions have some form of permit or approval from their national body.

## Competitions
Athletics competitions can be broadly divided into three types: international championships, national championships, and annual meetings and races. Athletics at international championships, or Games, represent the pinnacle of competition within the sport, and they are contested between athletes representing their country or region. The organisation of these competitions is usually overseen by either a world, continental, or regional athletics governing body. Athletes gain entry into these competitions by earning selection from their national athletics governing body, which is generally done by assessing athletes via their past achievements or performances at a national selection event. National championships are annual competitions endorsed by a national governing body which serve the purpose of deciding the country's best athlete in each event. Annual one-day meetings and races form the most basic level of competition and are the most common format of athletics contests. These events are often invitational and are organised by sports organisations, sports promoters, or other institutions.
Competitions typically feature only one of the sports within athletics. However, major outdoor international athletics championships and athletics competitions held as part ofmulti-sport eventsusually feature a combination of track and field, road running and racewalking events

## Multi-sport events
The modernSummer Olympicswas the first event at which a global athletics competition took place. All the four major sports within athletics have featured in theOlympic athletics programmesince its inception in 1896, although cross country has since been dropped. The Olympic competition is the most prestigious athletics contest, and many athletics events are among the most watched events at the Summer Olympics. A total of 47 athletics events are held at the Olympics, 24 for men and 23 for women (as of London 2012). The events within the men's and women's programmes are either identical or have a similar equivalent, with the sole exception being that men contest the 50 km race walk.[76]
Following the model of the Olympics, various othermulti-sport eventsarose during the 20th century, which included athletics as a core sport within the programme from the outset. These included theCommonwealth Games, theCentral American and Caribbean Games,Universiade, and many others.
TheSummer Paralympicsinclude athletes with aphysical disability. Track and field, and road events have featured in theParalympic athletics programmesince its inception in 1960. The Paralympic competition is the most prestigious athletics contest where athletes with a physical disability compete. Athletics at the Paralympic Games also includewheelchair racingwhere athletes compete in lightweight racing chairs. Athletes with avisual impairmentcompete with asighted guide. At the2012 Summer ParalympicsinLondon, for the first time at an international athletics event, the guides received medals,[77]such as the pilots in cycling, and the guides at theParalympic Winter Gameshave done for a while.

## World championships
TheWorld Athletics Championshipsis the primary global athletics championships held by World Athletics. The biennial competition was first held in 1983 and now features an event programme which is identical to the Olympics. Thus, road running, racewalking and track and field are the sports which feature at the competition. Cross country running has its own discrete global championships – theWorld Athletics Cross Country Championships– which has been held annually since 1973. TheWorld Athletics Indoor Championshipsis a biennial athletics championships which features solely indoor track and field events. The foremost separate road running event is the annualWorld Athletics Half Marathon Championships(formerlyIAAF World Half Marathon Championships). While not having official world championship status, the biennialWorld Athletics Race Walking Team Championshipsfulfils a similar role for the sport of racewalking. Outdoor track and field is the only sport in athletics that does not have a its own distinct global championship which is separate from other types of athletics, although theIAAF Continental Cup(a quadrennial competition between continental teams) is composed entirely of outdoor track and field events.
Other world championships include theWorld Athletics U20 Championshipsand the 2017 defunctWorld Youth Championships in Athletics, which are for athletes under-19 and under-17, respectively.World Masters Athleticsconducts theWorld Masters Athletics Championshipsfor athletes in 5-year age divisions over the age of 35.  The now defunctIAAF World Road Relay Championshipsserved as the global event forekidenmarathon relay races.
Elite athletes with a physical disability compete at theWorld Para Athletics Championships.

## Area/Continental championships
African,Asian,European,North & Central and Caribbean(NACAC),OceaniaandSouth AmericanAthletics Championships are held regularly in a variety of configurations. For example, theOceania Area Championships in Athleticsare combined with theOceania U20 Athletics Championships. Most of the main regions hold separate cross-country, road-running and marathon championships.
There is thePan American Combined Events Cup.Central American and Caribbean Championshipsare organised by theCentral American and Caribbean Athletic Confederation(the CACAC)).

## Culture and media
Athletics, and its athletes in particular, has been artistically depicted since ancient times – one of the surviving instances include runners and high jumpers in the motifs ofAncient Egyptiantombs dating from 2250 BC. Athletics was much respected in Ancient Greece and the events within theancient pentathlonprovided inspiration for large statues such as theDiscobolusandDiscophoros, and for motifs on countless vase andpotteryworks.Aristotlediscussed the significance of the pentathlon in histreatiseRhetoricand reflected on the athlete aesthetic of the period: "a body capable of enduring all efforts, either of the racecourse or of bodily strength...This is why the athletes in the pentathlon are most beautiful".[78]
Films about athletics are overwhelmingly focused on running events: the 1962 filmThe Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner(based on thebook of the same name) explores cross country running as a means of escape.Chariots of Fire, perhaps one of the most well-known athletics films, is a fictionalised account ofEric LiddellandHarold Abrahams's chase for sprintgold medalsat the1924 Olympics. Track and field has been the subject of American films such asPersonal Best(1981) andAcross the Tracks(1991).Biopicsare found within the genre, includingPrefontaine(regardingSteve Prefontaine) andJim Thorpe – All-American(1951) featuringBurt Lancasteras Thorpe. Documentaries are also common with examples such as 2007 filmSpirit of the Marathon, which follows runners' preparations for the 2005Chicago Marathon.
Books on the subject are predominantly non-fiction, and tend towards the forms of training manuals and historical accounts of athletics. The story of thefour-minute milehas been a particularly popular subject, spawning books such asThe Perfect Mileand3:59.4: The Quest to Break the Four Minute Mile.
Athleticsjournalismhas spawned a number of dedicatedperiodicalsincludingAthletics WeeklyandRace Walking Record, both of which were first published in England in the early 1940s, andTrack & Field Newswhich was first published in the United States in 1948.Runner's Worldhas been in print since 1966 and theTrack & Field Magazine of Japan(Rikujyo Kyogi Magazine) is another long-running publication.
Athletics events have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors' coins.  One of the recent samples is the €10 GreekRunning commemorative coin, minted in 2003 to commemorate the2004 Summer Olympics. In the obverse of the coin, a modern athlete figure appears in the foreground, shown in the starting position, while in the background two ancient runners are carved in a manner that gives the appearance of a coin that is "worn" by time. This scene originally appeared on a black-figure vase of the 6th century BC.