## Statelessness
Ininternational law, astatelessperson is someone who is "not considered as a national by anystateunder the operation of its law".[2]Some stateless people are alsorefugees. However, not all refugees are stateless, and many people who are stateless have never crossed aninternational border.[3]At the end of 2022, theUnited Nations High Commissioner for Refugeespublished an estimation of 4.4 million people worldwide as either stateless or of undetermined nationality, which is 90,800 (or 2%) more than at the end of 2021. However, the data itself is not complete because UNHCR does not have data from many countries, such as from at least 22 countries where mass statelessness exists.[4][5]The data also does not include de facto stateless people who have no legal identification to prove their nationality or legal existence. According to the World Bank, at least 850 million fit that category.[6]
The status of a person who might be stateless ultimately depends on the viewpoint of the state with respect to the individual or a group of people. In some cases, the state makes its view clear and explicit; in others, its viewpoint is harder to discern. In those cases, one may need to rely onprima facieevidence of the view of the state, which in turn may give rise to a presumption of statelessness.[7]

## Conflict of law
Conflicting nationality laws are one of the main causes of "stateless births".[8]At birth, nationality is usually acquired through one of two modes, although many nations recognize both modes today:
A person who has neither parent eligible to transmit nationality byjus sanguinisis "born stateless" if born in a state which does not recognizejus soli. For example, if that child were born in India and neither parent had naturalized yet, then the child could be stateless, since India confers nationality only to children born to at least one Indian parent.[11]

## Gender discrimination injus sanguinis
Although most states allow the acquisition of nationality through parental descent irrespective of where the child is born, some do not allow female citizens to confer nationality to their children.[12]As of 2022, women in 24 countries, mostly in Africa and Asia, are legally restricted from transmitting their nationality onto their offspring.[13][14]This can result in statelessness when the father is stateless, unknown, or otherwise unable to confer nationality to the child born to the unnaturalized mother in a foreign country without unrestricted jus soli. Beginning around 2003, there have been changes in favor of sex neutrality in nationality laws in some nations, including reforms inAlgeria,Morocco, andSenegalthat may inform change elsewhere. For example, Algeria amended itsnationality codein 2005 to grant Algerian nationality to children born in or outside Algeria to an Algerian mother or father.[15]Moreover, theConvention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women[16]prohibits sex-based discrimination in the conferral of nationality.
An important measure to prevent statelessness at birth bestows nationality to children born in a territory who would otherwise be stateless. This norm is stipulated in the 1961Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness;[17]appears in several regional human rights treaties, including theAmerican Convention on Human Rights, theEuropean Convention on Nationality, and theAfrican Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child; and is implicit in theUnited Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.[18]

## Ethnicity
Many states define their body of citizens based onethnicity, leading to the exclusion of large groups. This violates international laws against discrimination. TheUnited Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discriminationstated on October 1, 2014, that the "deprivation of citizenship on the basis of race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin is a breach of States' obligations to ensure non-discriminatory enjoyment of the right to nationality".[19]

## State succession
In some cases, statelessness is a consequence ofstate succession.[20]Some people become stateless when their state of nationality ceases to exist, or when the territory on which they live comes under the control of another state. This was the case after theSoviet Unionhaddisintegrated in 1991, and also in the cases ofYugoslavia,[failed verification]East PakistanandEthiopia.[21][22][23]According to theUnited Nations Office of Legal Affairs, theCouncil of Europe Convention on the Avoidance of Statelessness in Relation to State Successionis the only treaty that aims to reduce this problem.[24]Seven states have joined it.[25]

## Political or religious conflicts
Many Muslim or ChristianPalestiniansfledIsraelfrom 1947–1950. In 1950, the newly formed state of Israel introduced aLaw of Returnthat gave Jews the right to become citizens with voting rights shortly after immigration.[26]However, the same right to return was not given to the many Palestinians who fled from 1947–1950, causing many of them to become stateless.  In December 1948, the UN approvedUnited Nations General Assembly Resolution 194, which affirmed that "refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at peace with their neighbours should be permitted to do so at the earliest practicable date".

## Administrative obstacles
People may also become stateless as a result of administrative and practical problems, especially when they are from a group whose nationality is questioned.[27]Individuals might be entitled to citizenship but unable to undertake the necessary procedural steps. They may be required to pay excessive fees for documentation proving nationality, to provide documentation that is not available to them, or to meet unrealistic deadlines; or they may face geographic orliteracybarriers.
In disruptive conflict or post-conflict situations, many people find that difficulties in completing simple administrative procedures are exacerbated.[28]Such obstacles may affect the ability of individuals to complete procedures such as birth registration, fundamental to the prevention of statelessness in children. Whilst birth registration alone does not confer citizenship on a child, the documentation of place of birth and parentage is instrumental in proving the link between an individual and a state for the acquisition of nationality.[29]TheUnited Nations Children's Fund(UNICEF) estimated in 2013 that 230 million children under the age of 5 have not been registered.[30]
Not holding proof of nationality—being "undocumented"—is not the same as being stateless, but the lack of identity documents such as abirth certificatecan lead to statelessness. Millions of people live, or have lived, their entire lives with no documents, without their nationality ever being questioned.
Two factors are of particular importance:
If nationality is acquired automatically, the person is a national regardless of documentation status (although in practice, the person may face problems accessing certain rights and services because they are undocumented, not because they are stateless). If registration is required, then the person is not a national until that process has been completed.
As a practical matter, the longer a person is undocumented, the greater the likelihood that they will end up in a situation where no state recognizes them as a national.

## Renunciation
In rare cases, individuals may become stateless upon renouncing their citizenship (e.g., "world citizen"Garry Davisand, from 1896 to 1901,Albert Einstein, who, in January 1896, at the age of 16, renounced hisWürttembergcitizenship to avoid conscription; in February 1901 his application for Swiss citizenship was accepted).[31][32]People who ascribe toVoluntaryist,Agorist, or some other philosophical, political, or religious beliefs may desire or seek statelessness (ideological statelessness). Many states do not allow citizens to renounce their nationality unless they acquire another. However, consular officials are unlikely to be familiar with the citizenship laws of all countries, so there may still be situations where renunciation leads to effective statelessness.
Some may even desire statelessness to avoid future military duties by having a citizenship, or to avoidcitizenship-based taxationpracticed by countries like the US.

## Non-state territories
Only states can have nationals, and people of non-state territories may be stateless. This includes for instance residents of occupied territories where statehood never emerged in the first place, has ceased to exist and/or is largely unrecognized. Examples include theWestern Sahararegion. People who are recognized to be citizens by the government of an unrecognized country may not consider themselves stateless, but nevertheless may be widely regarded as such especially if other countries refuse to honor passports issued by an unrecognized state.

## Stateless nations
Astateless nationis anethnic groupor nation that does not possess its ownstate. The term "stateless" implies that the group "should have" such a state (country). The term was coined in 1983 by the political scientist Jacques Leruez in his bookL'Écosse, une nation sans Étatabout the peculiar position ofScotlandwithin theBritish state. It was later adopted and popularized byScottishscholars such as David McCrone,Michael KeatingandT. M. Devine. A notable contemporary example of a stateless nation is theKurds. TheKurdish populationis estimated to be between 30 and 45 million,[33]but they do not have a recognized sovereign state. Members of stateless nations are often not necessarily personally stateless as individuals, as they are frequently recognized as citizens of one or more recognized state(s).[citation needed]

## History
While statelessness in some form has existed continuously throughout human history, the international community has only been concerned with its eradication since the middle of the 20th century. In 1954, the United Nations adopted theConvention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons,[34]which provides a framework for the protection of stateless people. Seven years later, the United Nations adopted theConvention on the Reduction of Statelessness.[35]In addition, a range of regional and international human rights treaties guarantee a right to nationality, with special protections for certain groups, including stateless persons.

## In antiquity
In a historical sense, statelessness could reasonably be considered to be the default human condition that existed universally from the evolution of human species to the emergence of the first human civilizations. Historically in every inhabited region on Earth, prior the emergence ofstates as politieshumans organized intotribal groups. In the absence of written laws, people living in tribal settings were typically expected to adhere to tribal customs and owed allegiance to their tribe and/or tribal leaders. As states began to form, a distinction developed between those who had some form of legal attachment to a more complex polity recognized to be a state in contrast to those who did not. The latter, often living in tribes and in regions not yet organized into and/or conquered by more powerful states, would widely be considered to be stateless in a modern sense. Historically, there is considerable correlation between those who would meet the modern definition of statelessness and those the contemporary ruling classes of the extant states would have deemed to be merebarbarians.
However, civilizations of this period more often distinguished between a subject and aslaveas opposed to between a citizen and a subject. In many monarchies, the concept of citizenship as something distinct from that of a subject did not exist – people under a monarch's rule who were considered subjects typically enjoyed more rights than a slave, and would presumably not have been considered "stateless" by the monarch. But even slaves in a monarchical state were often considered to have a legal status more desirable, at least from the perspective of the ruler, compared to those living outside the frontiers in tribal settings who were typically regarded as barbarians. Depending on the circumstances, a monarch seeking to conquer a frontier region would seek to eithersubjugateorenslavethe inhabitants, but either would impart on the conquered population a change from stateless barbarian to some form of legal status in which allegiance and/or obedience to the ruler could be expected.
With the emergence of the concept of citizenship in theGreco-Roman world, the status of slaves and inhabitants of conquered territories duringClassical antiquitybecame in some ways analogous to contemporary statelessness. In antiquity, such "statelessness" affected captive and subject populations denied full citizenship, including those enslaved (e.g., conquered populations excluded fromRoman citizenship, such as theGaulsimmediately following theGallic Wars, or theIsraelitesunderBabylonian captivity). However, there was a major difference between captive and subject populations in contrast to those living outside the boundaries of cohesive states – while both could be considered stateless, the latter typically only needed to adhere to local tribal customs whereas the former were not only expected to obey the laws of the state they were living in, but were often subjected to laws not imposed on and punishments not inflicted on full citizens. Among the more widely-known examples of this was the Romans' frequent use ofcrucifixionto punish Roman subjects, considered to be a highly degrading form of capital punishment that could not legally be inflicted on Roman citizens.

## Before World War II
Some characteristics of statelessness could be observed amongapostatesandslaves in Islamic society(the former shunned for rejecting their religious birth identity, the latter having been separated from that identity and subsumed into anunderclass). Statelessness also used to characterize theRomani people, whose traditionalnomadiclifestyles meant that they traveled across lands claimed by others.
TheNansen International Office for Refugeeswas an international organization of theLeague of Nationsin charge ofrefugeesfrom 1930 to 1939. It received theNobel Peace Prizein 1938.Nansen passports, designed in 1922 by founderFridtjof Nansen, were internationally recognizedidentity cardsissued to statelessrefugees. In 1942, they were honored by governments in 52 countries.
ManyJewsbecame stateless before and during theHolocaust, because theNuremberg lawsof 1935 stripped them of their German citizenship.

## After World War II
TheUnited Nations(UN) was set up in 1945, immediately after the end ofWorld War II. From its inception, the UN had to deal with the mass atrocities of the war, including the huge refugee populations across Europe. To address the nationality and legal status of these refugees, theUnited Nations Economic and Social Council(ECOSOC) requested that theUN Secretary-Generalcarry out a study of statelessness in 1948.
In 1948, theUniversal Declaration on Human Rights(UDHR) was adopted. It provided both a right to asylum (Article 14) and a right to nationality (Article 15). The declaration also expressly prohibited arbitrary deprivation of nationality, which had affected many of the wartime refugees.
In 1949, theInternational Law Commissionput "Nationality, including statelessness", on its list of topics of international law provisionally selected for codification. In 1950, at the behest of ECOSOC, that item was given priority, and ECOSOC appointed an ad hoc Committee on Refugees and Stateless People to draft a convention. A treaty on refugees was prepared with a draft protocol addressing the status of stateless persons.
TheConvention Relating to the Status of Refugeeswas adopted on July 28, 1951. As of January 2005, it had attracted the signatures of 145 state parties.[36]Since theInternational Refugee Organization—the predecessor to theUnited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees(UNHCR)—was in the process of being dissolved, the convention was adopted without the protocol addressing statelessness.[citation needed]
TheInternational Law Commission, at its fifth session in 1953, produced both a Draft Convention on the Elimination of Future Statelessness and a Draft Convention on the Reduction of Future Statelessness. ECOSOC approved both drafts. In 1954, the UN adopted theConvention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons. This convention provided a definition of a stateless person (which has since become part ofcustomary international law, according to the International Law Commission) and set out a number of rights that stateless persons should enjoy. The convention thus became the basis for an international protection regime for stateless persons. However, to ensure that the rights enumerated in the convention are protected, states need to be able to identify stateless individuals.[37][38]
Seven years later, in 1961—only one year after the 1954 convention entered into force—the UN adopted theConvention on the Reduction of Statelessness.
In 2014, following a series of expert meetings, UNHCR issued a Handbook on Protection of Stateless Persons.[39]
Stateless refugees covered by the 1951 convention should be treated in accordance with internationalrefugee laws. As of September 1, 2015, 86 states were party to the 1954 convention, up from 65 when UNHCR launched its conventions campaign in 2011.[40]

## Statelessness since 1961
On December 13, 1975, the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness entered into force. It provides a number of standards regarding acquisition andloss of nationality, including automatic loss, renunciation, and deprivation of nationality.
In 1974, theUN General Assembly(UNGA) requested that UNHCR undertake the functions established by the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. While the convention had only 37 state parties on January 1, 2011, 33 states pledged to accede to it at a ministerial event organized by UNHCR in December 2011. As of September 1, 2015, the number of state parties had increased to 64.[41]
States bound by the 1989Convention on the Rights of the Childare obligated to ensure that every child acquires a nationality.[42]The convention requires states to implement this provision in particular where the child would otherwise be stateless, and in a manner that is in thebest interestsof the child.[43]
Starting in 1994, the UNHCR Executive Committee (ExCom) and the UNGA asked UNHCR to broaden its activities concerning statelessness to include all states.[44][45]In 1996, UNHCR was asked by the UNGA to actively promote accessions to the 1954 and 1961 conventions, as well as to provide interested states with technical and advisory services pertaining to the preparation and implementation of nationality legislation.
An internal evaluation released in 2001[46]suggested that UNHCR had done little to exercise its mandate on statelessness. Only two individuals were tasked with overseeing work in that area at UNHCR headquarters, though some field officers had been trained to address the issue. The evaluation also noted that there was no dedicated budget line.
Concerned organisations such as theOpen Society Justice InitiativeandRefugees Internationalhave called for UNHCR to dedicate more human and financial resources to statelessness.[47]In 2006, a statelessness unit (now a statelessness section) was established inGeneva, and staffing has increased both in headquarters and in the field. As part of an overhaul of UNHCR's budget structure in 2010, the budget dedicated to statelessness increased from approximately US$12 million in 2009 to $69.5 million in 2015.[48]
In addition to regular staff in regional and country offices, UNHCR has regional statelessness officers inDakar,Senegal, for West Africa;Nairobi,Kenya, for theHorn of Africa;Pretoria, South Africa, for Southern Africa;San José, Costa Rica, for the Americas;Bangkok,Thailand, for Asia and the Pacific;Almaty,Kazakhstan, for Central Asia;Brussels,Belgium, for Europe; andAmman,Jordan, for the Middle East and North Africa.
In 2004, ExCom instructed UNHCR to pay particular attention to situations of protracted statelessness and to explore, in cooperation with states, measures that would ameliorate and end these situations. In 2006, it provided UNHCR with more specific guidance on how to implement its mandate. The Conclusion on Identification, Prevention and Reduction of Statelessness and Protection of Stateless Persons requires UNHCR to work with governments, other UN agencies, and civil society to address statelessness.[49]UNHCR's activities are currently categorized as identification, prevention, reduction, and protection.
UNHCR has achieved some success with campaigns to prevent and reduce statelessness among peoples in theCrimeanpeninsula (Armenians,Crimean Tatars,Germans, andGreeks) who were deporteden masseat the close of World War II. Another success has been the naturalization ofTajikrefugees inKyrgyzstan, as well as campaigns that have enabled 300,000Tamilsto acquire Sri Lankan citizenship. UNHCR also helped theCzech Republicreduce the large number of stateless persons created when itseparatedfromSlovakia.
At the beginning of 2006, the UNHCR reported that it had records of 2.4 million stateless persons, and estimated that there were 11 million worldwide. By the end of 2014, UNHCR had identified close to 3.5 million stateless persons in 77 countries and estimated the total number worldwide to be more than 10 million.[50]
UNHCR does not report refugee populations in its statelessness statistics to avoiddouble counting, which would affect the total number of "persons of concern". Stateless refugees are counted as refugees, not as stateless. For the same reason, Palestinian refugees under the mandate of theUnited Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East(UNRWA) are not reported in the UNHCR statelessness table. Instead, they are referred to elsewhere in UNHCR's statistical reporting.
While the two UN conventions on statelessness constitute the primary international framework for the protection of stateless persons and the reduction of statelessness, there are also regional instruments of great importance. The 1997European Convention on Nationality, for example, has contributed to protecting the rights of stateless persons and provides standards for reducing statelessness in theCouncil of Europeregion. That document emphasizes the need of every person to have a nationality, and seeks to clarify the rights and responsibilities of states in ensuring individual access to a nationality.
Some of the largest populations of stateless persons are found inAlgeria,Bangladesh,Bhutan,Cambodia,Democratic Republic of the Congo,Dominican Republic,Estonia,India,Ivory Coast,Kenya,Latvia,Malaysia,Mauritania,Myanmar,Nepal,Brunei,Saudi Arabia,Bahrain, theUnited Arab Emirates,Kuwait,Qatar,Iraq,Syria,Lebanon, andThailand.[citation needed]

## Airports
Some stateless people have received widespread public attention in airports due to their status asports of entry.
One famous case is that ofMehran Karimi Nasseri, who lived inCharles de Gaulle AirportinParis, France for approximately 18 years after he was denied entry to the country. His Iranian passport and UN refugee documents had been stolen. He may have had a British mother, but he did not have British citizenship. The 1994 French filmTombés du cieland the 2004 American filmThe Terminalare fictional stories inspired by his experiences.[51]

## During change of citizenship
Countries that restrictmultiple nationalityoften require immigrants who apply for naturalisation to obtain official documentation from their countries of origin proving that they are no longer citizens.[52]In others, includingTaiwan, the documentation must be provided prior to the granting of citizenship. During the period between the cancellation of the prior citizenship and the granting of the new citizenship by naturalization, the applicant may be officially stateless. In two cases in Taiwan, Pakistani immigrants applied for naturalization and renounced their Pakistani citizenship. In the interim, the decisions to permit their naturalization as citizens of Taiwan were reversed, leaving them stateless.[53]

## Australia
As of 30 April 2017[update], Australia had 37 stateless people in onshore detention, who had been detained for an average of 2 years and 106 days and the longest was 3 years and 250 days.[54]The number of stateless people in offshore detention is unknown. There were a further 57 stateless people living in the community after being approved for a residence determination.[55]In Australia, statelessness is not itself a ground for grant of a visa and the person must instead rely upon other grounds, such as being a refugee.[56]Notable cases include:

## Bahrain
Many individuals in Bahrain, calledBidoon, do not have a nationality. A number of people have also had their citizenship revoked and are now stateless; the revocation took place after they criticised the Bahraini government. This situation also occurs in other Middle Eastern countries.[65]

## Brazil
Brazil is among the few countries in the world to have in its law the recognition of a stateless person to provide documents to this person as an official citizen of the country.[66][67]Mahaand Souad Mamo, who had lived in Brazil for four years as refugees, were the first stateless persons recognized by the Brazilian state after the creation of the new migration law (Law No. 13,445),[68]which came into force in 2017. The migration law provides protective measures for stateless persons, facilitating the guarantees of social inclusion and simplified naturalization for citizens without a homeland. The legislation follows international conventions of respect for stateless persons and seeks to reduce the number of people in this situation, giving the right to request nationality. Countries having similar laws usually offer stateless persons the access to basic rights such as education and health, while in their documents they are still recognized as stateless with a residence permit.[69]With its law, Brazil offers naturalization, which means that these persons can by all effects become Brazilians. If the stateless persons do not wish to apply for immediate naturalization, they are granted at least definitive residency in the country.[70][71]

## Brunei
Many stateless permanent residents live inBrunei. Most have lived on Bruneian soil for generations, but Bruneian nationality is governed by the policy ofjus sanguinis; the right to hold it comes from blood ties. The government of Brunei has made obtaining citizenship possible, albeit difficult, for stateless persons who have inhabited Brunei for many generations. Requirements include rigorous tests inMalayculture, customs, andlanguage. Stateless permanent residents of Brunei are given anInternational Certificate of Identity, which allows them to travel overseas. The majority of Brunei's Chinese and Indians are permanent residents who are stateless.
Holders of International Certificates of Identity can enter Germany andHungaryvisa-free for a maximum of 90 days within a 180-day period. In the case of Germany, in theory, for an individual to benefit from the visa exemption, the ICI must be issued under the terms of the1954 Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, and it must contain an authorization to return to Brunei with a sufficiently long period of validity.
Brunei is a signatory to the 1959Declaration of the Rights of the Child, which states that "the child shall be entitled from his birth to a name and a nationality", but it does not currently follow the guidelines of the convention. TheSultan of Bruneihas announced changes that may expedite the process by which stateless persons with permanent residence status sit for citizenship exams.[72]

## Canada
An amendment to theCanadian Citizenship Act(S.C. 2008, c. 14, previously Bill C-37) came into effect on April 17, 2009, and changed the rules for the acquisition of foreign-born Canadiancitizenship.[73]Individuals born outside Canada can now become Canadian citizens by descent only if at least one of their parents was either anative-born citizenor anaturalisedcitizen of Canada.
The new law limits citizenship by descent to one generation born outside Canada. All individuals born within one generation of the native-born or naturalised citizen parent are automatically recognised as Canadian citizens, but second-generation descendants born abroad are no longer citizens of Canada at birth, and such individuals might be stateless if they have no claim to any other citizenship. Since the passage of Bill C-37, this situation has already occurred at least twice:
Under Bill C-37, the term "native-born" is construed strictly: children born outside of Canada to Canadian government employees working abroad, including diplomats andCanadian Forcespersonnel, are considered foreign-born.[75]
The bill was intended to resolve the status of so-called "Lost Canadians"—people who considered themselves Canadians, with undeniable connections to the country, but who had either lost or never been granted citizenship because of the vagaries of the country's previous nationality law.[78]

## Dominican Republic
An estimated 800,000Haitians reside in the Dominican Republic.[79]For much of its history, the Dominican Republic had ajus solipolicy, meaning that all children born in the country, even to undocumented parents, were automatically given citizenship. Most countries in theWestern Hemispherepractice this policy, but in June 2013, the Dominican high court amended existing legislation to exclude fromjus solicitizenship children born "in transit", such as the children of foreign diplomats and "those on their way to another country".[80]Since 2013, the law has been expanded to address the children of non-citizens, such as Haitian migrants who immigrated after 1929.
Since the passing of the amendment, nearly 200,000 Dominicans of Haitian descent have been stripped of their Dominican citizenship.[81]Without birth certificates, identification, or nationality, they are stateless and living illegally in the Dominican Republic. As of July 2015, according to theInternational Organization for Migration, about 1,133 individuals had voluntarily or involuntarily relocated to Haiti.[82]By law, many are eligible to apply for naturalised citizenship in either Haiti or the Dominican Republic, but financial, bureaucratic, and discriminatory obstacles have prevented many from doing so.

## Estonia and Latvia
EstoniaandLatvia, two neighboring European countries, became independent from theRussian Empirein 1918, fell underSoviet occupationfrom 1940 untilGerman occupationin 1941 and then again under renewedSoviet Occupationafter 1944. When their independence was restored in 1991, citizenship was automatically restored to individuals who had been Latvian citizens prior to June 18, 1940, and their descendants or Estonian citizens prior to June 16, 1940, and their descendants.  Citizens of the Soviet Union who had moved to Estonia or Latvia while they were occupied by theSoviet Uniondid not receive citizenship automatically in 1991, and neither did their descendants. They had to apply for naturalisation as immigrants, a process that included a knowledge test and a language test inEstonianorLatvian.[83][84]Children born after Latvia re-established independence (August 21, 1991), to parents who are both non-citizens, are also entitled to citizenship at the request of at least one of the parents.
These criteria mainly excludedethnic Russians, Ukrainians, Belorussians, and other ethnic minorities. Thousands of ethnic Latvians and Estonians were also impacted and became stateless.[85]Russia has a visa waiver for stateless persons living in Estonia and Latvia, while Estonian and Latvian citizens need to obtain a visa to enter Russia. These stateless persons can also travel freely within theSchengen area, but they are not permitted to work within the European Union.[86]As of 2013[update], more than 267,000 residents of Latvia and 91,000 residents of Estonia were stateless.[87]

## Greece
Article 19 of theGreek Citizenship Code(Law 3370 of 1955) stated: "A person of non-Greek ethnic origin leaving Greece without the intention of returning may be declared as having lost Greek citizenship. This also applies to a person of non-Greek ethnic origin born and domiciled abroad. Minor children living abroad may be declared as having lost Greek citizenship if both their parents, or the surviving parent, have lost it as well." (TheMinister of the Interiordecides such cases, with the concurring opinion of the Citizenship Council.).
Article 19 was abolished in 1998, but no provision was established for restoring citizenship to people who had lost it. Interior Minister Alekos Papadopoulos stated that, since the article's introduction in 1955, 60,000 Greeks had lost their citizenship because of it, many of these people moved and adopted the nationality of another country. However, an estimated 300–1,000 people remain stateless in Greece (primarily minorities inThrace, some of whom never settled abroad) and other former Greek citizens are stateless outside the country (an estimated 1,400 inTurkeyand an unknown number elsewhere).
Stateless individuals in Greece have had difficulty receiving social services like health care and education. Until December 1997, they were denied the protection of the 1954 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, which Greece ratified in 1975. Then, as a result of pressure fromnongovernmental organizationsand minority deputies, around 100 ethnic Turks made stateless under Article 19 received identity documents from Greek authorities in accordance with the 1954 U.N. Convention. In August 1998, Foreign MinisterTheodoros Pangalosstated that within a year, most or all stateless persons living in Greece would be offered Greek citizenship; this promise was repeated in subsequent months by Alternate and Deputy Foreign MinistersGeorge PapandreouandGiannos Kranidiotis. However, the government took no steps to carry out this promise.

## Hong Kong
Hong Kong, as aspecial administrative region of China, does not have its own citizenship laws. Theright of abodeis the status that allows unrestricted right to live, work, vote and to hold most public office in Hong Kong; persons with right of abode in Hong Kong are calledpermanent residents. Most permanent residents of Chinese descent are Chinese citizens as provided by theChinese nationality law. Citizens of other countries who have obtained right of abode in Hong Kong remain the citizens of their respective countries, and enjoy all the rights accorded to permanent residents except for those restricted to permanent residents with Chinese citizenship, such as the right to aHKSAR passportand the eligibility to be elected for all political offices except as members for 12 functional constituencies.
When Hong Kong wastransferredfrom the United Kingdom to China on July 1, 1997, allBritish Dependent Territories citizens(BDTCs) connected to Hong Kong lost theirBritish nationality, unless they had applied for theBritish National (Overseas)(BN(O)) status. Most BDTCs of Chinese descent became Chinese citizens. BDTCs who did not become Chinese citizens and did not apply for BN(O) status while holding no other citizenship becameBritish Overseas citizens(BOCs). As BN(O) and BOC statuses do not provide right of abode in the United Kingdom, BN(O)s and BOCs of non-Chinese descent who do not hold any other citizenship arede factostateless. However,British nationality lawallows BN(O)s and BOCs who are otherwise stateless to register for full British citizenship. In addition, the Chinese nationality law as applied in Hong Kong provides the option of naturalisation as a Chinese national.[88]
Chinese citizens from the mainland who had migrated to Hong Kong on aOne-way Permitlose their mainlandhukou(household registration). They then must reside in Hong Kong for 7 years before gaining the right of abode in Hong Kong. Therefore, persons who had migrated out of the mainland but have not obtained Hong Kongpermanent residency, while technically not stateless, are unable to exercise rights and privileges associated with citizenship in either the mainland or Hong Kong.
Stateless permanent residents of Hong Kong and Chinese migrants without right of abode may apply for aHong Kong Document of Identity for Visa Purposes, which allows them to travel overseas.[89]This document (with few exceptions) requires the holder to apply for and receive a travel visa prior to departure from Hong Kong.
Children born to foreign domestic workers are not classified as citizens because Chinese nationality is determined by blood ties. Under the visa regulations governing foreign domestic workers, the government of Hong Kong may award an unconditional stay visa. Many of these children can obtain citizenship in their parents' country of birth. When they are put up foradoption, however, citizenship applications can become challenging. In cases where both adoptive parents are Chinese nationals, the children will likely remain stateless. Applying forChinese citizenshipby naturalisation is only possible for permanent residents of Hong Kong, and an unconditional stay visa does not grant this status.[citation needed]
Eliana Rubashkyn, atransgenderwoman and refugee, becamede factostateless in 2013 after being detained for over eight months on the grounds that her appearance did not match her passport photo.[90]She suffered mistreatment in detention atChek Lap Kok Airportand inKowloon'sQueen Elizabeth Hospital.[91][92]She was granted refugee status, but Hong Kong did not recognize her as a refugee because it is not a signatory to the refugee convention of 1951 and sought to deport her to Colombia. In 2013, the UN sought a third country to resettle her due to the lack of protections forLGBTpeople and refugees in Hong Kong. After almost one year, a UN declaration recognized her as a woman under international law, and she was sent to New Zealand, where she received asylum.

## South Asia
As of 2012, India andPakistanwere each holding several hundred prisoners from the other for violations like trespass or visa overstay, often with accusations of espionage. Some of these prisoners have been denied citizenship in both countries, leaving them stateless. In Pakistani law, if one leaves the country for more than seven years without any registration from a Pakistani embassy or foreign mission of any country, they lose Pakistani citizenship.
In 2012, theBBCreported on the case of Muhammad Idrees, who lived in Pakistan and had been held under Indian police control for approximately 13 years for overstaying his 15-day visa by 2–3 days after seeing his ill parents in 1999.[93]He spent much of those 13 years in prison waiting for a hearing, sometimes homeless or living with volunteer families. Both states denied him citizenship.
The BBC linked these problems to the political atmosphere caused by theKashmir conflict. The IndianPeople's Union for Civil Libertiestold the BBC it had worked on hundreds of cases with similar features. It called Idrees' case a "violation of all human rights, national and international laws", adding, "Everybody has a right to a nation." The IndianHuman Rights Law Networkblamed "officials in the home department" and slow courts, and called the case a "miscarriage of justice, a shocking case".[94]
InBangladesh, about 300,000–500,000 Bihari people (also known asStranded Pakistanis in Bangladesh) were rendered stateless when Bangladesh seceded fromPakistanin 1971. Bangladesh refused to consider them citizens because of their support for Pakistan in theBangladesh Liberation Warwhile Pakistan insisted that since Bangladesh was successor state ofEast Pakistan, the new nation had a responsibility to absorb the Bihari people just asWest Pakistanhad done with refugees flooding from the war, including Bengali people. As a result, the Bihari people became stateless.
Over 100,000Bhutanese refugees, who have neither Bhutanese nor Nepalese citizenship, reside in Nepal.

## Indonesia
In February 2020, the Indonesia government stated that any Indonesian national who ever joined theIslamic State of Iraq and the Levant(ISIL) had automatically lost their Indonesian citizenship. Presidential Chief of StaffMoeldokostated that the ISIL sympathizers "are stateless". Article 23 ofIndonesian nationality lawstates that Indonesian nationals can lose their citizenship after, among other things, "joining a foreign military or taking an oath of allegiance to another country".[95]

## Japan
WhenJapanlost control over Korea in 1945, those Koreans who remained in Japan receivedChōsen-seki, a designation of nationality that did not actually grant themcitizenship. Roughly half of these people later receivedSouth Korean citizenship. The other half were affiliated withNorth Korea, which isunrecognized by Japan, and they are legally stateless. Practically speaking, they mostly holdNorth Korean citizenship(albeit meaningless in Japan, their country of residence) and may repatriate there, and under Japanese law, they are treated as foreign nationals and given the full privileges entitled to that class. In 2010, Chōsen-seki holders were banned fromSouth Korea.[96][97]
UNHCR published a study on statelessness in Japan in 2010.[98]

## Kuwait
Kuwait has the largest stateless population in the entire region.[99]In 2024, Kuwait revoked the citizenship of 42,000 people in just six months.[100]Most stateless Bedoon of Kuwait belong to the northern tribes, especially theAl-Muntafiqtribal confederation.[101][102][103][104][105][106][107][108]A minority of stateless Bedoon in Kuwait belong to the'Ajam community.[109]
Under the terms of theKuwait Nationality Law15/1959, all the Bedoon in Kuwait are eligible for Kuwaiti nationality by naturalization.[110]In practice, it is widely believed that Sunnis of Persian descent or tribal Saudis can readily achieve Kuwaiti naturalization whilst Bedoon of Iraqi tribal ancestry cannot.[111]As a result, many Bedoon in Kuwait feel pressured to hide their background.[112]
From 1965 until 1985, the Bedoon were treated as Kuwaiti citizens and guaranteed citizenship: they had free access to education, health care and all the other privileges of citizenship.[113]The stateless Bedoon constituted 80-90% of theKuwaiti Armyin the 1970s and 1980s until theGulf War.[114]
In 1985, at the height of theIran–Iraq War, the Bedoon were reclassified as "illegal residents" and denied Kuwaiti citizenship and its accompanying privileges.[113][114][115]The Iran–Iraq War threatened Kuwait's internal stability and the authorities feared the sectarian background of the stateless Bedoon.[114]The Bedoon issue in Kuwait "overlaps with historic sensitivities aboutIraqiinfluence inside Kuwait", with many of those denied Kuwaiti nationality being believed to have originated from Iraq.[116]
In 1985, the then emir,Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah, escaped anassassination attempt.[117][118]After the assassination attempt, the government changed the Bedoon's status from that of legal residents toillegal residents.[114]By 1986, the Bedoon were fully excluded from the same social and economic rights as Kuwaiti citizens.
Since 1986, the Kuwaiti government has refused to grant any form of documentation to the Bedoon, including birth certificates, death certificates, identity cards, marriage certificates, and driving licences. The Bedoon also face many restrictions in employment, travel and education. They are not permitted to educate their children in state schools and universities.
In 1995,Human Rights Watchreported that there were 300,000 stateless Bedoon, and this number was formally repeated by the British government.[119][120]
According to several human rights organizations, the State of Kuwait is committingethnic cleansingandgenocideagainst the stateless Bedoon.[121][105]The Kuwaiti Bedoon crisis resembles theRohingyacrisis inMyanmar.[110]In 1995, it was reported in theBritishparliamentthat the Al Sabah ruling family had deported 150,000 stateless Bedoon to refugee camps in the Kuwaiti desert near theIraqi borderwith minimal water, insufficient food and no basic shelter, and that they were threatened with death if they returned to their homes in Kuwait City.[120][108]As a result, many of the stateless Bedoon fled to Iraq, where they remain stateless people even today.[122][123]The Kuwaiti government also stands accused of attempting to falsify their nationalities in official state documents.[124]There have been reports offorced disappearancesandmass gravesof Bedoon.[121][125][126][127][128][129][108]
The 1995 Human Rights Watch report stated:
"The totality of the treatment of the Bedoons amounts to a policy of denationalization of native residents, relegating them to an apartheid-like existence in their own country. The Kuwaiti government policy of harassment and intimidation of the Bedoons and of denying them the right to lawful residence, employment, travel and movement, contravene basic principles of human rights. Denial of citizenship to the Bedoons clearly violates international law. Denying Bedoons the right to petition the courts to challenge governmental decisions regarding their claims to citizenship and lawful residence in the country violates the universal right to due process of law and equality before the law."[120]
British MPGeorge Gallowaystated:
"Of all the human rights atrocities committed by the ruling family in Kuwait, the worst and the greatest is that against the people known as the Bedoons. There are more than 300,000 Bedoons—one third of Kuwait's native population. Half of them—150,000—have been driven into refugee camps in the desert across theIraqi borderby the regime and left there to bake and to rot. The other 150,000 are treated not as second-class or even fifth-class citizens, but not as any sort of citizen. They are bereft of all rights. It is a scandal that almost no one in the world cares a thing about the plight of 300,000 people, 150,000 of them cast out of the land in which they have lived [when] many have lived in the Kuwaiti area for many centuries."[120]
By 2004, the Bedoon accounted for only 40% of the Kuwaiti Army, a major reduction from their presence in the 1970s and 1980s.[130]In 2013, the UK government estimated that there were 110,729 "documented" Bedoon in Kuwait, without giving a total estimate, but noting that all stateless individuals in Kuwait remain at risk of persecution and human rights breaches.[131]The Bedoon are generally categorized into three groups: stateless tribespeople, stateless police/military and the stateless children of Kuwaiti women who married Bedoon men.[114]According to the Kuwaiti government, there are only 93,000 "documented" Bedoon in Kuwait.[131]In 2018, the Kuwaiti government claimed that it would naturalize up to 4,000 stateless Bedoon per year but this is considered unlikely.[111][132]
In recent years, the rate ofsuicideamong Bedoon has risen sharply.[113]

## Myanmar
TheRohingya peopleare a minority group inMyanmar(formerly Burma). They are considered racially inferior by the Myanmar government, and are thus denied citizenship from birth. Instead, they are given identification cards which single them out and which do not grant them the rights of citizenship. This has created some 700,000 stateless persons, been a basis for theRohingya genocide, and precipitated an international refugee crisis.[133]

## Pakistan
InsideKarachicity there is a stateless population of approximately 1.2 millionPakistani Bengalis.[134]
As of January 2022, there were approximately 3 million Afghans living in Pakistan. Of those, around 1.4 million of them are Proof of Registration (PoR) cardholders, approximately 840,000 hold an Afghan Citizen Card (ACC), and an estimated 775,000 are undocumented.[135]

## Palestinians
Abbas Shiblakestimates that over half of the Palestinian people in the world are stateless.[136]
Palestinians in Lebanonandthose in Syriaare constitutionally denied citizenship, and are thus stateless.
After Israel annexedEast Jerusalemfollowing theSix-Day Warin 1967, Palestinians living there received, along with Israelipermanent residencystatus, the right to apply for citizenship. Shortly after the offer was made, it was rejected by Arab leaders. Between 1967 and 2007, only 12,000 of the 250,000 Palestinians living in Jerusalem have been granted Israeli citizenship.[137][138]Since 2007, more have applied, although the majority still reject it.[139]Those who do not have Israeli citizenship are generally stateless.
Many descendants of Palestinian refugees live permanently in countries of which they would be expected to be citizens, but they are not citizens because that country adheres to the policy of theArab Leaguein denying citizenship to Palestinians.[citation needed]
Even though Palestinians living in theWest Bankand theGaza Stripwere issuedPalestinian passportsunder theOslo Accordsand Palestinian legal statehood is somewhat widely acknowledged internationally as of 2018, some countries (such as the United States), recognize them as travel documents but do not recognize their citizenship. According to international law,[citation needed]only states can have nationals (meaning citizens), meaning that the remainder states who do not considerPalestinea state implements such policies and deem its holders as “stateless”.
A similar situation exists forArmenians in Israel and Palestine, where as of 2023[update], about 2,000 Armenians in Israeli-controlled territory were stateless.[140]

## Philippines
As of 2021, there are around 700 people of Japanese descent who are considered as stateless. Most of these people are descendants of Japanese fathers who settled in the Philippines in the early 20th century. Due to the outbreak of the World War II, many of these individuals separated from their fathers who either enlisted in the Imperial Japanese Army, repatriated to Japan or died during the war. After the war many of them settled in more remote areas of the Philippines and discarded proof of the Japanese nationality as a preventive measure againstanti-Japaneseretaliatory attacks due to atrocities committed by Japan during the war.[141]

## Puerto Rico
In 1994,Juan Mari Brás, aPuerto Ricanlawyer and political historian, renounced his American citizenship before a consular agent in the United States Embassy ofVenezuela. In December 1995, his loss of nationality was confirmed by theUS Department of State. That same month, he requested that the Puerto Rico State Department furnish him with proof of hisPuerto Rican citizenship. The request involved more than just a bureaucratic formality; Mari Brás tested theself-determinationofPuerto Ricoby trying to become the first Puerto Rican citizen who was not also an American citizen.[142]
Mari Brás claimed that as a Puerto Rican national born and raised in Puerto Rico, he was clearly a Puerto Rican citizen and therefore had every right to continue to reside, work, and, most importantly, vote in Puerto Rico. The State Department responded promptly, claiming that Puerto Rican citizenship did not exist independent of American citizenship, and in 1998, the department rescinded its recognition of his renunciation of citizenship. The official response to Mari Brás stated that Puerto Rican citizenship existed only as an equivalent toresidency. However, thePuerto Rico State Departmentissues certificates of citizenship to people born outside of Puerto Rico to a Puerto Rican parent, including some people who may have never resided in the territory.[143]

## Qatar
Most ofQatar'sBedoonare stateless tribesmen from theGhufranitribe. In 2005, Qatar stripped the citizenship of over 5,000 members of the tribe. After international outcry, it restored the citizenship of approximately 2,000.[144]Today, there are between 1,200 and 1,500 Bedoon in Qatar.[144][145]

## Saudi Arabia
Dissidents and other people can have their citizenship revoked.[146]Osama bin Ladenwas asked to hand in his passport in the 1990s.[147]

## Syria
By 2011, close to an estimated 300,000stateless Kurds were in Syria.[148]While the government's implementation of the 2011 Decree did reduce the number of stateless persons, a significant part of Syria's remaining statelessness problem has now been 'exported' to new geographic and legal contexts with the displacement of affected persons out of the country.[149]

## Thailand
The UNCHR estimates 574,200 stateless people born and living in Thailand in 2022,[1]up from 443,862 in 2016. Mostly they are from hill tribes or are the children of illegal migrants, most of them from Myanmar. Stateless people in Thailand suffer serious disadvantages. Unlike Thai citizens, they cannot use government facilities where they must first show an ID card. They cannot go to a clinic or hospital for treatment of illness or injury. They cannot open a bank account. They cannot buy and use a smartphone, or own and drive a car, or buy property or a home. Some progress is being made, but "...these efforts are halfhearted and plagued with bureaucratic hurdles" according to theBangkok Post. It gives as an example a new law, passed in 2008, that grants Thai citizenship to stateless people. But it applies only to those who were born before 26 February 1992, thus impacting the young most harshly. The good news is that stateless children can now attend state schools. Also, a new law allows stateless people to seek employment in professions not explicitly reserved for Thais. State hospitals now issue birth certificates to all children, a formality often neglected in the past. Importantly, the Thai military government has adopted the goal of "zero statelessness" by 2024.[150]In 2024, the government planned pathways for stateless people to gain permanent residency and eventually citizenship for themselves and their Thai-born children.[151]

## Turkey
Following afailed coupin 2016, the Turkishgovernmentrevoked about 50,000 passports.[152]While most of the people whose passports were revoked were in Turkey at the time, one notable Turkish expatriate affected by this action wasNBAplayerEnes Kanter. He is a vocal critic of Turkish presidentRecep Tayyip Erdoğanand a public supporter of theGülen movement, which the government blamed for the coup attempt. Kanter's passport was canceled while he was attempting to travel to the U.S., and he was briefly detained inRomaniabefore being allowed to continue his travel. Turkey issued an arrest warrant against Kanter in May 2017, claiming that he was a member of "an armed terrorist organization."[153]The government's action effectively rendered Kanter stateless, and soon after this incident expressed a desire to seek U.S. citizenship. He then held a U.S.green card, which technically enabled him to travel to and from Canada for gamesin Toronto.[154]However, in the2018–19 season, Kanter did not travel with his team to games in London or Toronto because Turkey had requested anInterpol red noticeagainst him.[155]On November 29, 2021, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, changing his name toEnes Kanter Freedom.[156][157]

## Ukraine
After the completion of his term,GeorgianPresidentMikheil Saakashvilimoved toUkrainewhere he was given citizenship and appointedGovernorof Ukraine'sOdesa Oblast.[158]Due to Georgian restrictions ondual nationality, he was stripped of his Georgian citizenship.
While visiting the U.S. in 2017, Saakashvili's Ukrainian citizenship was revoked by Ukrainian PresidentPetro Poroshenko, leaving Saakashvili stateless.[159][160]After the election ofVolodymyr Zelenskyin 2019, Saakashvili's Ukrainian citizenship was restored.[161][162]

## United Arab Emirates
In the United Arab Emirates some stateless people were granted citizenship after many years and even decades. Children of a foreign parent were also granted citizenship.[163][164][165]

## United Kingdom
Different classes inBritish nationality lawhave led to situations in which people were considered British subjects but not nationals, or in which people held aBritish passportwithoutright of abodein the United Kingdom. Examples includeBritish Protected Persons, who are considered British nationals. British nationals (irrespective of the class of nationality) who reside abroad but are not entitled to protection by the British government arede factostateless.[who?]
Many situations that put people at risk of statelessness were resolved after April 30, 2003, when theNationality, Immigration and Asylum Act of 2002came into force. As a result of this act, the United Kingdom gave most people with residual British nationality but no other citizenship the right to register as full British citizens. However, there are still some people who have not been able or willing to register as citizens.[specify]Following the publication of a joint UNHCR-Asylum Aid report in 2011,[166]the UK adopted a statelessness determination procedure in 2013.[167]
In January 2014, theImmigration Bill 2013–14was introduced to extend thepowers of the Home Secretaryto deprive a naturalised British citizen of their citizenship, even if that renders the individual stateless, if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the deprivation of citizenship is conducive to the public good because the person "has conducted him or herself in a manner which is seriously prejudicial to the vital interests of the UK." A naturalised British citizen is someone who was not born a British citizen but has become one through the legal process of naturalisation, by which someone with no automatic claim to British citizenship can obtain the same rights and privileges as someone who was born a British citizen. The bill was initially blocked by theHouse of Lordsin April 2014.[168]However, the Lords reconsidered their decision in May 2014, and the bill returned to theHouse of Commonsbefore being set into UK law.[citation needed]

## United States
The United States, which is not a signatory to the 1954Convention on the Status of Stateless Personsor the1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, is one of the countries that allow their citizens torenounce their citizenshipeven if they do not hold any other. TheForeign Affairs ManualinstructsState Departmentemployees to make it clear to Americans who will become stateless after renunciation that they may face extreme difficulties (including deportation back to the United States) following their renunciation, but to afford such persons their right to give up citizenship.[169]Former Americanswho have voluntarily made themselves stateless includeGarry Davisin the beginning years of the United Nations,[170][171]Thomas Jolleyduring theVietnam War,[172]Joel Slateras a political protest in 1987 while believing that he would obtain Australian citizenship,[170]andMike Gogulskias a political protest in 2008 without attempting to take any other citizenship.[171]The UNHCR published a report on statelessness in the United States in 2012 in which it recommended the establishment of a determination procedure that incorporates a definition of statelessness in accordance with international law to ensure that stateless persons are permitted to reside in the United States.[173]
TheFourteenth Amendmentof theUS Constitutiongranted citizenship toAfrican Americanslaves. The Supreme Court ruling inUnited States v. Wong Kim Arkclarified that people born to aliens on US soil were entitled to citizenship under the Fourteenth Amendment.[174]However, it excluded Native Americans by defining a citizen as any person born in the US, but only if "subject to the jurisdiction thereof"; this latter clause excluded anyone who was born intribal nationswithin the United States, as the Supreme Court ruled in the 1884 case ofElk v. Wilkinsthat they are "quasi-foreign nations who deal with Congress using treaties". TheIndian Citizenship Actof 1924 addressed the issue by granting citizenship to America's indigenous peoples.[175][176]
TheCenter for Migration Studies of New Yorkestimated 218,000 stateless people were in the United States in 2017, based on theAmerican Community Survey.[177]

## Uruguay
Uruguay has ratified both the 1954Convention on the Status of Stateless Personsand the 1961Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, and implemented law19682to meet these ratified commitments. It is also a signatory of the "Brazil Declaration" which commits countries in the South American region to end statelessness by January 1, 2024.[needs update]
However, the 1968 law provides for Uruguayan citizenship as one of the mechanisms to end statelessness. While the process of naturalization to citizenship is similar to other ius domicilii regimes, it does not lead toUruguayan nationality. As a result, stateless residents will become stateless citizens, and also citizens of countries that do not allow for dual citizenship also become stateless citizens of Uruguay. Uruguayan passports issued to this group of citizens highlights their status through "XXX" in the national field, meaning "unknown nationality".

## Statelessness mandate
UNHCR's responsibilities were initially limited to stateless persons who were refugees, as set out in Paragraph 6(A)(II) of its statute and Article 1(A)(2) of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.[39]They were expanded following the adoption of the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. General Assembly Resolutions 3274 (XXIV) and 31/36 designated UNHCR as the body responsible for examining the cases of persons who claimed the benefit of the 1961 convention and assisting such persons in presenting their claims to the appropriate national authorities.[178]Subsequently, theUnited Nations General Assemblyconferred upon UNHCR a global mandate for the identification, prevention, and reduction of statelessness and for the international protection of stateless persons.[179][180]This mandate has continued to evolve as the General Assembly has endorsed the conclusions of the UNHCR Executive Committee, notably Executive Committee Conclusion No. 106 of 2006 on the "identification, prevention, and reduction of statelessness and protection of stateless persons".[181]

## Global campaign to end statelessness
The UNHCR launched a global campaign on November 4, 2014, to end statelessness within 10 years.
As part of the campaign, it published a special report providing a comprehensive overview of statelessness and delving into the human impact of the phenomenon.[182]It also published an open letter addressed to states, urging them to take action. In addition to UNHCR High CommissionerAntónio Guterres, the letter was signed byAngelina Jolie, a UNHCR special envoy;Surin Pitsuwan, former secretary-general of ASEAN;Shirin Ebadi, aNobel Peace Prizelaureate; Archbishop EmeritusDesmond Tutu;Barbara Hendricks, a UNHCR honorary lifetime goodwill ambassador;Madeleine Albright, former US secretary of state;Carla Del Ponte, former chief prosecutor of two UN international criminal tribunals;Zeid Ra'ad Al HusseinandLouise Arbour, former UN high commissioners for human rights; and DameRosalyn Higgins, former president of theInternational Court of Justice, among others.[183]
In addition, a "global action plan to end statelessness" was launched following consultation with states, civil society, and international organisations. It sets out a guiding framework of 10 actions that need to be taken to end statelessness by 2024.[184]
The plan includes actions to:
The 10 actions are:

## International Stateless Persons Organisation
In March 2012, the International Stateless Persons Organisation (ISPO), aninternational non-governmental organization, was founded by Dr. Fernando Macolor Cruz, a tribal prince and instructor of history and political science atPalawan State Universityinthe Philippines. It aims to provide institutional representation to stateless persons throughout the world through a network of volunteer human rights law practitioners who act as country representatives.

## Institute on Statelessness and Inclusion
TheInstitute on Statelessness and Inclusion(ISI), is the first and only civil society organisation dedicated to promoting the right to a nationality and the rights of stateless people globally. It works with partners around the world to promote everyone’s equal right to a nationality and the human rights of all stateless people, while supporting stateless people in their efforts to achieve meaningful change. ISI works to strengthen resilience, leadership, collaboration and resourcing of stateless-led initiatives and ensuring that those impacted by statelessness lead and are centred in efforts to address statelessness. It serves as incubator of theGlobal Movement Against Statelessnessand as an active steering group member of theGlobal Statelessness Fund. ISI helps to connect and facilitate exchange between individuals and groups working on the issue, including as the convenor of regular learning programmes and theWorld Conferences on Statelessness. ISI also contributes towards strengthening the evidence base for action and facilitating information and knowledge-sharing, including by reporting on developments and opportunities in itsMonthly Bulletinand curating the online knowledge platformStatelessHub. It plays a bridging role between different stakeholders – including by supporting civil society engagement with UN human rights mechanisms, as co-convenor of the world’s only dedicated journal on statelessness,the Statelessness and Citizenship Review, and by making connections with key actors working on intersecting issues. ISI is established as a Dutch foundation (‘stichting’) and has two offices: in Rotterdam and London.

## European Network on Statelessness
TheEuropean Network on Statelessness, a civil society alliance, was set up to address the problem of 600,000 stateless persons in Europe and to act as a coordinating body and expert resource for organisations across Europe that work with or come into contact with stateless persons.