## Sulfur
This is an accepted version of this page
Sulfur(American spellingand thepreferred IUPAC name) orsulphur(Commonwealth spelling)[9]is achemical element; it hassymbolSandatomic number16. It isabundant,multivalentandnonmetallic. Undernormal conditions, sulfur atoms formcyclic octatomic moleculeswith the chemical formulaS8. Elemental sulfur is a bright yellow,crystallinesolid atroom temperature.
Sulfur is the tenth most abundant element by mass in the universe and the fifth most common onEarth. Though sometimes found in pure,nativeform, sulfur on Earth usually occurs assulfideandsulfate minerals. Being abundant in native form, sulfur was known in ancient times, being mentioned for its uses inancient India,ancient Greece,China, andancient Egypt. Historically and in literature sulfur is also calledbrimstone,[10]which means "burning stone".[11]Almost all elemental sulfur is produced as a byproduct of removing sulfur-containing contaminants fromnatural gasandpetroleum.[12][13]The greatest commercial use of the element is the production ofsulfuric acidfor sulfate and phosphatefertilizers, and other chemical processes. Sulfur is used inmatches,insecticides, andfungicides. Many sulfur compounds are odoriferous, and the smells of odorized natural gas,skunkscent,bad breath,grapefruit, andgarlicare due toorganosulfurcompounds.Hydrogen sulfidegives the characteristic odor to rotting eggs and other biological processes.
Sulfur is anessential elementfor all life, almost always in the form oforganosulfur compoundsormetal sulfides.Amino acids(twoproteinogenic:cysteineandmethionine, and many othernon-coded:cystine,taurine, etc.) and two vitamins (biotinandthiamine) are organosulfur compounds crucial for life. Manycofactorsalso contain sulfur, includingglutathione, andiron–sulfur proteins.Disulfides, S–S bonds, confer mechanical strength and insolubility of the (among others) proteinkeratin, found in outer skin, hair, and feathers. Sulfur is one of the core chemical elements needed forbiochemicalfunctioning and is an elementalmacronutrientfor all living organisms.

## Physical properties
Sulfur forms several polyatomic molecules. The best-known allotrope isoctasulfur, cyclo-S8. Thepoint groupof cyclo-S8is D4dand its dipole moment is 0 D.[14]Octasulfur is a soft, bright-yellow solid that is odorless.[a]It melts at 115.21 °C (239.38 °F),[b]and boils at 444.6 °C (832.3 °F).[10]At 95.2 °C (203.4 °F), below its melting temperature, cyclo-octasulfur begins slowly changing from α-octasulfur to the β-polymorph.[16]The structure of the S8ring is virtually unchanged by this phase transition, which affects the intermolecular interactions. Cooling molten sulfur freezes at 119.6 °C (247.3 °F),[17]as it predominantly consists of the β-S8molecules.[c]Between its melting and boiling temperatures, octasulfur changes its allotrope again, turning from β-octasulfur to γ-sulfur, again accompanied by a lower density but increasedviscositydue to the formation ofpolymers.[16]At higher temperatures, the viscosity decreases as depolymerization occurs. Molten sulfur assumes a dark red color above 200 °C (392 °F). The density of sulfur is about 2 g/cm3, depending on the allotrope; all of the stable allotropes are excellent electrical insulators.
Thesublimationof sulfur becomes noticeable more or less between 20 °C (68 °F) and 50 °C (122 °F), and occurs readily in boiling water at 100 °C (212 °F).[21]
Sulfur is insoluble in water but soluble incarbon disulfideand, to a lesser extent, in othernonpolarorganic solvents, such asbenzeneandtoluene. Sulfur is also soluble insupercritical carbon dioxide.[22]

## Chemical properties
Under normal conditions, sulfurhydrolyzesvery slowly to mainly formhydrogen sulfideandsulfuric acid:
The reaction involvesadsorptionof protons ontoS8clusters, followed bydisproportionationinto the reaction products.[23]
The second, fourth and sixthionization energiesof sulfur are 2252 kJ/mol, 4556 kJ/mol and 8495.8 kJ/mol, respectively. The composition of reaction products of sulfur with oxidants (and its oxidation state) depends on whether releasing of reaction energy overcomes these thresholds. Applyingcatalystsand/orsupply of external energymay vary sulfur's oxidation state and the composition of reaction products. While reaction between sulfur and oxygen under normal conditions gives sulfur dioxide (oxidation state +4), formation ofsulfur trioxide(oxidation state +6) requires a temperature of 400–600 °C (750–1,100 °F) and presence of a catalyst.
In reactions with elements of lesserelectronegativity, it reacts as an oxidant and forms sulfides, where it has oxidation state −2.
Sulfur reacts with nearly all other elements except noble gases, even with the notoriously unreactive metaliridium(yieldingiridium disulfide).[24]Some of those reactions require elevated temperatures.[25]

## Allotropes
Sulfur forms over 30 solidallotropes, more than any other element.[26]Besides S8, several other rings are known.[27]Removing one atom from the crown gives S7, which is of a deeper yellow than S8.HPLCanalysis of "elemental sulfur" reveals an equilibrium mixture of mainly S8, but with S7and small amounts of S6.[28]Larger rings have been prepared, including S12and S18.[29][30]
Amorphousor "plastic" sulfur is produced by rapid cooling of molten sulfur—for example, by pouring it into cold water.X-ray crystallographystudies show that the amorphous form may have ahelicalstructure with eight atoms per turn. The long coiled polymeric molecules make the brownish substanceelastic, and in bulk it has the feel of crude rubber. This form ismetastableat room temperature and gradually reverts to the crystalline molecular allotrope, which is no longer elastic. This process happens over a matter of hours to days, but can be rapidly catalyzed.

## Isotopes
Sulfur has 23 knownisotopes, four of which are stable:32S (94.99%±0.26%),33S (0.75%±0.02%),34S (4.25%±0.24%), and36S (0.01%±0.01%).[1]Other than35S, with ahalf-lifeof 87.37 days, theradioactiveisotopes of sulfur have half-lives less than 3 hours.
The preponderance of32S is explained by its production in thealpha process(one of the main classes of nuclear fusion reactions) in exploding stars. Other stable sulfur isotopes are produced in the bypass processes related with34Ar[clarification needed], and their composition depends on the type of a stellar explosion. For example, proportionally more33S comes fromnovaethan fromsupernovae.[31]
It has been found that the proportion of the two most abundant sulfur isotopes32S and34S varies in different samples by a surprising large amount. Determination of the isotope ratio (δ34S) in the samples indicates their chemical history, and with support of other methods, it allows to age-date the samples, estimate temperature of equilibrium between ore and water, determine pH and oxygenfugacity, identify the activity ofsulfate-reducing bacteriain the time of formation of the sample, or suggest the main sources of sulfur in ecosystems.[32]However, there are ongoing discussions over the real reason for the δ34S shifts, biological activity or postdeposit alteration.[33]
For example, whensulfide mineralsare precipitated, isotopic equilibration between solid and liquid may cause small differences in the δ34S values of co-genetic minerals. The differences between minerals can be used to estimate the temperature of equilibration. Theδ13Cand δ34S of coexistingcarbonate mineralsand sulfides can be used to determine thepHand oxygen fugacity of the ore-bearing fluid during ore formation.
Scientists measure thesulfur isotopesofmineralsin rocks andsedimentsto study theredoxconditions in past oceans.Sulfate-reducing bacteriain marine sediment fractionatesulfur isotopesas they take insulfateand producesulfide. Prior to the 2010s, it was thought that sulfate reduction could fractionatesulfur isotopesup to 46permil[34]and fractionation larger than 46 permil recorded in sediments must be due todisproportionationof sulfur compounds in the sediment. This view has changed since the 2010s as experiments showed thatsulfate-reducing bacteriacan fractionate to 66 permil.[35]As substrates for disproportionation are limited by the product ofsulfate reduction, the isotopic effect of disproportionation should be less than 16 permil in most sedimentary settings.[36]
Inforestecosystems, sulfate is derived mostly from the atmosphere; weathering of ore minerals and evaporites contribute some sulfur. Sulfur with a distinctive isotopic composition has been used to identify pollution sources, and enriched sulfur has been added as a tracer inhydrologicstudies. Differences in thenatural abundancescan be used in systems where there is sufficient variation in the34S of ecosystem components.Rocky Mountainlakes thought to be dominated by atmospheric sources of sulfate have been found to have measurably different34S values than lakes believed to be dominated by watershed sources of sulfate.
The radioactive35S is formed incosmic ray spallationof the atmospheric40Ar. This fact may be used to verify the presence of recent (less than a year old) atmospheric sediments in various materials. This isotope may be obtained artificially in different ways. In practice, the reaction35Cl+n→35S +pis used, irradiatingpotassium chloridewith neutrons.[37]The isotope35S is used in various sulfur-containing compounds as aradioactive tracerfor many biological studies, for example, theHershey-Chase experiment.
Because of the weakbeta activityof35S, its compounds are relatively safe as long as they are not ingested or absorbed by the body.[38]

## Natural occurrence
32S is created inside massive stars, at a depth where the temperature exceeds 2.5 billion K, by thefusionof one nucleus of silicon plus one nucleus of helium.[39]As this nuclear reaction is part of thealpha processthat produces elements in abundance, sulfur is the 10thmost common element in the universe.
Sulfur, usually as sulfide, is present in many types ofmeteorites.Ordinary chondritescontain on average 2.1% sulfur, andcarbonaceous chondritesmay contain as much as 6.6%. It is normally present astroilite(FeS), but there are exceptions, with carbonaceous chondrites containing free sulfur, sulfates and other sulfur compounds.[40]The distinctive colors ofJupiter'svolcanicmoonIoare attributed to various forms of molten, solid, and gaseous sulfur.[41]In July 2024, elemental sulfur was accidentally discovered to exist onMarsafter theCuriosity roverdrove over and crushed a rock, revealing sulfur crystals inside it.[42]
Sulfur is the fifth most common element by mass in the Earth. Elemental sulfur can be found nearhot springsandvolcanicregions in many parts of the world, especially along thePacific Ring of Fire; such volcanic deposits are mined in Indonesia, Chile, and Japan. These deposits are polycrystalline, with the largest documented single crystal measuring 22 cm × 16 cm × 11 cm (8.7 in × 6.3 in × 4.3 in).[43]Historically,Sicilywas a major source of sulfur in theIndustrial Revolution.[44]Lakes of molten sulfur up to about 200 m (660 ft) in diameter have been found on the sea floor, associated withsubmarine volcanoes, at depths where the boiling point of water is higher than the melting point of sulfur.[45]
Native sulfur is synthesized byanaerobic bacteriaacting onsulfate mineralssuch asgypsuminsalt domes.[46][47]Significant deposits in salt domes occur along the coast of theGulf of Mexico, and inevaporitesin eastern Europe and western Asia. Native sulfur may be produced by geological processes alone. Fossil-based sulfur deposits from salt domes were once the basis for commercial production in the United States, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine.[48]Such sources have become of secondary commercial importance, and most are no longer worked but commercial production is still carried out in theOsiekmine in Poland.
Common naturally occurring sulfur compounds include thesulfide minerals, such aspyrite(iron sulfide),cinnabar(mercury sulfide),galena(lead sulfide),sphalerite(zinc sulfide), andstibnite(antimony sulfide); and thesulfate minerals, such asgypsum(calcium sulfate),alunite(potassium aluminium sulfate), andbarite(barium sulfate). On Earth, just as upon Jupiter's moon Io, elemental sulfur occurs naturally in volcanic emissions, including emissions fromhydrothermal vents.
The main industrial source of sulfur has becomepetroleumandnatural gas.[12]

## Compounds
Commonoxidation statesof sulfur range from −2 to +6. Sulfur forms stable compounds with all elements except thenoble gases.

## Electron transfer reactions
Sulfur polycations,S2+8,S2+4andS2+19are produced when sulfur is reacted with oxidizing agents in a strongly acidic solution.[49]The colored solutions produced by dissolving sulfur inoleumwere first reported as early as 1804 by C. F. Bucholz, but the cause of the color and the structure of the polycations involved was only determined in the late 1960s.S2+8is deep blue,S2+4is yellow andS2+19is red.[16]
Reduction of sulfur gives variouspolysulfideswith the formulaS2−x, many of which have been obtained in crystalline form. Illustrative is the production ofsodium tetrasulfide:
Some of these dianions dissociate to giveradical anions. For instance,S−3gives the blue color of the rocklapis lazuli.
This reaction highlights a distinctive property of sulfur: its ability tocatenate(bind to itself by formation of chains).Protonationof these polysulfide anions produces thepolysulfanes, H2Sx, wherex= 2, 3, and 4.[51]Ultimately, reduction of sulfur produces sulfide salts:
The interconversion of these species is exploited in thesodium–sulfur battery.

## Hydrogenation
Treatment of sulfur with hydrogen giveshydrogen sulfide. When dissolved in water, hydrogen sulfide is mildly acidic:[10]
Hydrogen sulfide gas and the hydrosulfide anion are extremely toxic to mammals, due to their inhibition of the oxygen-carrying capacity ofhemoglobinand certaincytochromesin a manner analogous tocyanideandazide(see below, underprecautions).

## Combustion
The two principal sulfur oxides are obtained by burning sulfur:
Many other sulfur oxides are observed including thesulfur-rich oxidesincludesulfur monoxide,disulfur monoxide, disulfur dioxides, andhigher oxidescontaining peroxo groups.

## Halogenation
Sulfur reacts withfluorineto give the highly reactivesulfur tetrafluorideand the highly inertsulfur hexafluoride.[52]Whereas fluorine gives S(IV) and S(VI) compounds, chlorine gives S(II) and S(I) derivatives. Thus,sulfur dichloride,disulfur dichloride, and higher chlorosulfanes arise from the chlorination of sulfur.Sulfuryl chlorideandchlorosulfuric acidare derivatives of sulfuric acid;thionyl chloride(SOCl2) is a common reagent inorganic synthesis.[53]Bromine also oxidizes sulfur to formsulfur dibromideanddisulfur dibromide.[53]

## Pseudohalides
Sulfur oxidizescyanideandsulfiteto givethiocyanateandthiosulfate, respectively.

## Metal sulfides
Sulfur reacts with many metals. Electropositive metals give polysulfide salts. Copper, zinc, and silver are attacked by sulfur; seetarnishing. Although manymetal sulfidesare known, most are prepared by high temperature reactions of the elements.[54]Geoscientists also study the isotopes of metal sulfides in rocks and sediment to study environmental conditions in the Earth's past.[55]

## Organic compounds
Some of the main classes of sulfur-containing organic compounds include the following:[56]
Compounds with carbon–sulfur multiple bonds are uncommon, an exception beingcarbon disulfide, a volatile colorless liquid that is structurally similar to carbon dioxide. It is used as a reagent to make the polymerrayonand many organosulfur compounds.[57]Unlikecarbon monoxide,carbon monosulfideis stable only as an extremely dilute gas, found between solar systems.[58]
Organosulfur compounds are responsible for some of the unpleasant odors of decaying organic matter. They are widely known as theodorantin domestic natural gas, garlic odor, and skunk spray, as well as a component ofbad breathodor. Not all organic sulfur compounds smell unpleasant at all concentrations: the sulfur-containingmonoterpenoidgrapefruit mercaptanin small concentrations is the characteristic scent of grapefruit, but has a generic thiol odor at larger concentrations.Sulfur mustard, a potentvesicant, wasused in World War Ias a disabling agent.[59]
Sulfur–sulfur bonds are a structural component used to stiffen rubber, similar to the disulfide bridges that rigidify proteins (see biological below). In the most common type of industrial "curing" or hardening and strengthening of naturalrubber, elemental sulfur is heated with the rubber to the point that chemical reactions formdisulfidebridges betweenisopreneunits of the polymer. This process, patented in 1843,[citation needed]made rubber a major industrial product, especially in automobile tires. Because of the heat and sulfur, the process was namedvulcanization, after the Roman god of the forge andvolcanism.

## Antiquity
According to theEbers Papyrus, a sulfur ointment was used in ancientEgyptto treat granular eyelids. Sulfur was used forfumigationin preclassicalGreece;[60]this is mentioned in theOdyssey.[61]Pliny the Elderdiscusses sulfur in hisNatural History, saying that its best-known source is the island ofMelos. He mentions its use for fumigation, medicine, and bleaching cloth.[62]
A natural form of sulfur known asshiliuhuangwas known in China since the 6th century BC and found inHanzhong.[63]By the 3rd century, the Chinese had discovered that sulfur could be extracted frompyrite.[63]ChineseDaoistswere interested in sulfur's flammability and its reactivity with certain metals, yet its earliest practical uses were found intraditional Chinese medicine.[63]TheWujing Zongyaoof 1044 AD described formulas for Chineseblack powder, which is a mixture ofpotassium nitrate,charcoal, and sulfur.[64]
English translations of the Christian Biblecommonly referred to burning sulfur as "brimstone", giving rise to the term "fire-and-brimstone"sermons, in which listeners are reminded of the fate ofeternal damnationthat await the unbelieving and unrepentant.Hellis implied to smell of sulfur.
Indian alchemists, practitioners of the "science of chemicals" (Sanskrit:रसशास्त्र,romanized:rasaśāstra), wrote extensively about the use of sulfur in alchemical operations with mercury, from the eighth century AD onwards.[66]In therasaśāstratradition, sulfur is called "the smelly" (गन्धक,gandhaka).
EarlyEuropeanalchemistsgave sulfur analchemical symbolof a triangle atop a cross (🜍). The variation known as brimstone has a symbol combining atwo-barred crossatop alemniscate(🜏). In traditional skin treatment, elemental sulfur was used (mainly in creams) to alleviate such conditions asscabies,ringworm,psoriasis,eczema, andacne. The mechanism of action is unknown—though elemental sulfur does oxidize slowly to sulfurous acid, a mild reducing and antibacterial agent.[67][68][69]

## Modern times
Sulfur appears in a column of fixed (non-acidic)alkaliin a chemical table of 1718.[71]Antoine Lavoisierused sulfur in combustion experiments, writing of some of these in 1777.[72]
Sulfur deposits inSicilywere the dominant source for more than a century. By the late 18th century, about 2,000 tonnes per year of sulfur were imported intoMarseille, France, for the production ofsulfuric acidfor use in theLeblanc process. InindustrializingBritain, with the repeal oftariffson salt in 1824, demand for sulfur from Sicily surged. The increasing British control and exploitation of the mining, refining, and transportation of sulfur, coupled with the failure of this lucrative export to transform Sicily's backward and impoverished economy, led to theSulfur Crisis of 1840, whenKing Ferdinand IIgave a monopoly of the sulfur industry to a French firm, violating an earlier 1816 trade agreement with Britain. A peaceful solution was eventually negotiated by France.[73][74]
In 1867, elemental sulfur was discovered in underground deposits inLouisianaandTexas. The highly successfulFrasch processwas developed to extract this resource.[75]
In the late 18th century,furnituremakers used molten sulfur to producedecorative inlays.[76]Molten sulfur is sometimes still used for setting steel bolts into drilled concrete holes where high shock resistance is desired for floor-mounted equipment attachment points. Pure powdered sulfur was used as a medicinal tonic and laxative.[48]
Since the advent of thecontact process, the majority of sulfur is used to make sulfuric acid for a wide range of uses, particularly fertilizer.[77]
In recent times, the main source of sulfur has becomepetroleumandnatural gas. This is due to the requirement to remove sulfur from fuels in order to preventacid rain, and has resulted in a surplus of sulfur.[12]

## Spelling and etymology
Sulfuris derived from the Latin wordsulpur, which wasHellenizedtosulphurin the erroneous belief that the Latin word came from Greek. This spelling was later reinterpreted as representing an /f/ sound and resulted in the spellingsulfur, which appears in Latin toward the end of theClassical period. The true Ancient Greek word for sulfur,θεῖον,theîon(from earlierθέειον,théeion), is the source of the international chemical prefixthio-. The Modern Standard Greek word for sulfur is θείο,theío.
In 12th-centuryAnglo-French, it wassulfre. In the 14th century, the erroneously Hellenized Latin-ph-was restored in Middle Englishsulphre. By the 15th century, both full Latin spelling variantssulfurandsulphurbecame common in English. The parallelf~phspellings continued in Britain until the 19th century, when the word was standardized assulphur.[78]On the other hand,sulfurwas the form eventually chosen in the United States, though multiple place names (such asWhite Sulphur Springs) use-ph-. Canada uses both spellings.
IUPACadopted the spellingsulfurin 1990[79][80]as did the Nomenclature Committee of theRoyal Society of Chemistryin 1992, restoring the spellingsulfurto Britain.[81]Oxford Dictionariesnote that "in chemistry and other technical uses ... the-f-spelling is now the standard form for this and related words in British as well as US contexts, and is increasingly used in general contexts as well."[82]

## Production
Sulfur may be found by itself and historically was usually obtained in this form;pyritehas also been a source of sulfur.[83]In volcanic regions inSicily, in ancient times, it was found on the surface of the Earth, and the "Sicilian process" was used: sulfur deposits were piled and stacked in brick kilns built on sloping hillsides, with airspaces between them. Then, some sulfur was pulverized, spread over the stacked ore and ignited, causing the free sulfur to melt down the hills. Eventually the surface-borne deposits played out, and miners excavated veins that ultimately dotted the Sicilian landscape with labyrinthine mines. Mining was unmechanized and labor-intensive, with pickmen freeing the ore from the rock, and mine-boys orcarusicarrying baskets of ore to the surface, often through a mile or more of tunnels. Once the ore was at the surface, it was reduced and extracted in smelting ovens. The conditions inSicilian sulfur mineswere horrific, promptingBooker T. Washingtonto write "I am not prepared just now to say to what extent I believe in a physical hell in the next world, but a sulfur mine in Sicily is about the nearest thing to hell that I expect to see in this life."[84]Sulfur is still mined from surface deposits in poorer nations with volcanoes, such asIndonesia, and problems with working conditions still exist.[85]
Elemental sulfur was extracted fromsalt domes(where it sometimes occurs in nearly pure form) until the late 20th century, when it became a side product of other industrial processes such as in oil refining, in which sulfur is undesirable. As a mineral, native sulfur under salt domes is thought to be a fossil mineral resource, produced by the action of anaerobic bacteria on sulfate deposits. It was removed from such salt-dome mines mainly by theFrasch process.[48]In this method, superheated water was pumped into a native sulfur deposit to melt the sulfur, and then compressed air returned the 99.5% pure melted product to the surface. Throughout the 20th century this procedure produced elemental sulfur that required no further purification. Due to a limited number of such sulfur deposits and the high cost of working them, this process for mining sulfur has not had significant use anywhere in the world since 2002.[86][87]
Since then, sulfur has typically been produced from petroleum,natural gas, and related fossil resources, from which it is obtained mainly ashydrogen sulfide.[12]Organosulfur compounds, undesirable impurities in petroleum, may be upgraded by subjecting them tohydrodesulfurization, which cleaves the C–S bonds:[86][87]
The resulting hydrogen sulfide from this process, and also as it occurs in natural gas, is converted into elemental sulfur by theClaus process, which entails oxidation of some hydrogen sulfide to sulfur dioxide and then thecomproportionationof the two:[86][87]
Due to the high sulfur content of theAthabasca Oil Sands, stockpiles of elemental sulfur from this process exist throughoutAlberta, Canada.[88]Another way of storing sulfur is as abinderfor concrete, the resulting product having some desirable properties (seesulfur concrete).[89]
The world production of sulfur in 2011 amounted to 69 million tonnes (Mt), with more than 15 countries contributing more than 1 Mt each. Countries producing more than 5 Mt areChina(9.6), theUnited States(8.8),Canada(7.1) andRussia(7.1).[90]Production has been slowly increasing from 1900 to 2010; the price was unstable in the 1980s and around 2010.[91]

## Sulfuric acid
Elemental sulfur is used mainly as a precursor to other chemicals. Approximately 85% (1989) is converted tosulfuric acid(H2SO4):
In 2010, the United States produced more sulfuric acid than any other inorganic industrial chemical.[91]The principal use for the acid is the extraction of phosphate ores for the production of fertilizer manufacturing. Other applications of sulfuric acid include oil refining, wastewater processing, and mineral extraction.[48]

## Other important sulfur chemistry
Sulfur reacts directly with methane to givecarbon disulfide, which is used to manufacturecellophaneandrayon.[48]One of the uses of elemental sulfur is invulcanizationof rubber, wherepolysulfidechains crosslink organic polymers. Large quantities ofsulfitesare used tobleachpaperand to preservedried fruit. Manysurfactantsanddetergents(e.g.sodium lauryl sulfate) are sulfate derivatives.Calcium sulfate, gypsum (CaSO4·2H2O) is mined on the scale of 100 milliontonneseach year for use inPortland cementand fertilizers.
When silver-basedphotographywas widespread, sodium and ammoniumthiosulfatewere widely used as "fixing agents". Sulfur is a component ofgunpowder("black powder").

## Fertilizer
Amino acidssynthesized byliving organismssuch asmethionineandcysteinecontainorganosulfurgroups (thioesterandthiolrespectively). Theantioxidantglutathioneprotecting many living organisms againstfree radicalsandoxidative stressalso contains organic sulfur. Somecropssuch asonionandgarlicalso produce differentorganosulfur compoundssuch assyn-propanethial-S-oxideresponsible of lacrymal irritation (onions), ordiallyl disulfideandallicin(garlic).Sulfates, commonly found insoilsandgroundwatersare often a sufficient natural source of sulfur for plants and bacteria.Atmospheric depositionofsulfur dioxide(SO2) is also a common artificial source (coal combustion) of sulfur for the soils. Under normal circumstances, in most agricultural soils, sulfur is not alimiting nutrientfor plants andmicroorganisms(seeLiebig's barrel). However, in some circumstances, soils can be depleted insulfate, e.g. if this later is leached bymeteoric water(rain) or if the requirements in sulfur for some types of crops are high. This explains that sulfur is increasingly recognized and used as a component offertilizers. The most important form of sulfur for fertilizer iscalcium sulfate, commonly found in nature as the mineralgypsum(CaSO4·2H2O). Elemental sulfur ishydrophobic(not soluble in water) and cannot be used directly by plants. Elemental sulfur (ES) is sometimes mixed withbentoniteto amend depleted soils for crops with high requirement in organo-sulfur. Over time,abioticprocesses involvingatmosphericoxygenas well as biological processes involvingsoil bacteriacanoxidizeand convert elemental sulfur to soluble compounds, which can in turn be used by microorganisms and plants. Sulfur improves the efficiency of other essential plant nutrients, particularlynitrogenand phosphorus.[92]Biologically produced sulfur particles are naturallyhydrophilicdue to abiopolymercoating and are easier to disperse over the land in a spray of diluted slurry, resulting in a faster uptake by plants.
The plant requirement for sulfur equals or exceeds the requirement forphosphorus. It is anessential nutrient for plantgrowth,root noduleformation of legumes, and immunity and defense systems. Sulfur deficiency has become widespread in many countries in Europe.[93][94][95]Because atmospheric inputs of sulfur continue to decrease, the deficit in the sulfur input/output is likely to increase unless sulfur fertilizers are used. Atmospheric inputs of sulfur decrease because of actions taken to limitacid rains.[96][92]

## Fungicide and pesticide
Elemental sulfur is one of the oldest fungicides andpesticides. "Dusting sulfur", elemental sulfur in powdered form, is a common fungicide for grapes, strawberry, many vegetables and several other crops. It has a good efficacy against a wide range ofpowdery mildewdiseases as well as black spot. In organic production, sulfur is the most important fungicide. It is the only fungicide used inorganicallyfarmed apple production against the main diseaseapple scabunder colder conditions. Biosulfur (biologically produced elemental sulfur with hydrophilic characteristics) can also be used for these applications.
Standard-formulation dusting sulfur is applied to crops with a sulfur duster orfrom a dusting plane. Wettable sulfur is the commercial name for dusting sulfur formulated with additional ingredients to make it watermiscible.[89][97]It has similar applications and is used as afungicideagainstmildewand other mold-related problems with plants and soil.
Elemental sulfur powder is used as an "organic" (i.e., "green")insecticide(actually anacaricide) againstticksandmites. A common method of application is dusting the clothing or limbs with sulfur powder.
A diluted solution oflime sulfur(made by combiningcalcium hydroxidewith elemental sulfur in water) is used as a dip for pets to destroyringworm (fungus),mange, and otherdermatosesandparasites.
Sulfur candles of almost pure sulfur were burned tofumigatestructures and wine barrels, but are now considered too toxic for residences.

## Pharmaceuticals
Sulfur (specificallyoctasulfur, S8) is used in pharmaceutical skin preparations for the treatment ofacneand other conditions. It acts as akeratolyticagent and also kills bacteria, fungi,scabiesmites, and other parasites.[98]Precipitated sulfur and colloidal sulfur are used, in form oflotions, creams, powders, soaps, and bath additives, for the treatment ofacne vulgaris,acne rosacea, andseborrhoeic dermatitis.[99]
Many drugs contain sulfur.[100]Early examples include antibacterialsulfonamides, known assulfa drugs. A more recent example is mucolyticacetylcysteine. Sulfur is a part of many bacterial defense molecules. Mostβ-lactamantibiotics, including thepenicillins,cephalosporinsandmonobactamscontain sulfur.[56]

## Batteries
Due to their high energy density and the availability of sulfur, there is ongoing research in creating rechargeablelithium–sulfur batteries. Until now, carbonate electrolytes have caused failures in such batteries after a single cycle. In February 2022, researchers atDrexel Universityhave not only created a prototypical battery that lasted 4000 recharge cycles, but also found the first monoclinic gamma sulfur that remained stable below 95 degrees Celsius.[101]

## Biological role
Sulfur is an essential component of all livingcells. It is the eighth most abundant element in the human body by weight,[102]about equal in abundance topotassium, and slightly greater thansodiumandchlorine.[103]A 70 kg (150 lb) human body contains about 140 grams (4.9 oz) of sulfur.[104]The main dietary source of sulfur for humans issulfur-containing amino acids,[105]which can be found in plant and animal proteins.[106]

## Transferring sulfur between inorganic and biomolecules
In the 1880s, while studyingBeggiatoa(a bacterium living in a sulfur rich environment),Sergei Winogradskyfound that it oxidizedhydrogen sulfide(H2S) as an energy source, forming intracellular sulfur droplets. Winogradsky referred to this form of metabolism as inorgoxidation (oxidation of inorganic compounds).[107]Another contributor, who continued to study it wasSelman Waksman.[108]Primitive bacteria that live around deep oceanvolcanic ventsoxidize hydrogen sulfide for their nutrition, as discovered byRobert Ballard.[13]
Sulfur oxidizers can use as energy sources reduced sulfur compounds, including hydrogen sulfide, elemental sulfur,sulfite,thiosulfate, and variouspolythionates(e.g.,tetrathionate).[109]They depend on enzymes such assulfur oxygenaseandsulfite oxidaseto oxidize sulfur to sulfate. Somelithotrophscan even use the energy contained in sulfur compounds to produce sugars, a process known aschemosynthesis. Somebacteriaandarchaeause hydrogen sulfide in place of water as theelectron donorin chemosynthesis, a process similar tophotosynthesisthat produces sugars and uses oxygen as theelectron acceptor. Sulfur-based chemosynthesis may be simplifiedly compared with photosynthesis:
There are bacteria combining these two ways of nutrition:green sulfur bacteriaandpurple sulfur bacteria.[110]Also sulfur-oxidizing bacteria can go into symbiosis with larger organisms, enabling the later to use hydrogen sulfide as food to be oxidized. Example: thegiant tube worm.[111]
There aresulfate-reducing bacteria, that, by contrast, "breathe sulfate" instead of oxygen. They use organic compounds or molecular hydrogen as the energy source. They use sulfur as the electron acceptor, and reduce various oxidized sulfur compounds back into sulfide, often into hydrogen sulfide. They can grow on other partially oxidized sulfur compounds (e.g. thiosulfates, thionates, polysulfides, sulfites).
There are studies pointing that many deposits of native sulfur in places that were the bottom ofthe ancient oceanshave biological origin.[112][113][114]These studies indicate that this native sulfur have been obtained through biological activity, but what is responsible for that (sulfur-oxidizing bacteria or sulfate-reducing bacteria) is still unknown for sure.
Sulfur is absorbed byplantsrootsfrom soil assulfateand transported as a phosphate ester. Sulfate is reduced to sulfide via sulfite before it is incorporated intocysteineand other organosulfur compounds.[115]
While the plants' role in transferring sulfur to animals byfood chainsis more or less understood, the role of sulfur bacteria is just getting investigated.[116][117]

## Protein and organic metabolites
In all forms of life, most of the sulfur is contained in twoproteinogenic amino acids(cysteineandmethionine), thus the element is present in allproteinsthat contain these amino acids.[118]Some of the sulfur is present in certain metabolites—many of which arecofactors—and sulfated polysaccharides ofconnective tissue(chondroitin sulfates,heparin).
The functionality of a given protein is heavily dependent on its structure. Proteins reach this structure through the process ofprotein folding, which is facilitated by a variety of intra- and inter-molecular bonds. While much of the folding is driven by the formation ofhydrogen bonds,covalent bondingof cysteine residues into disulfide bridges imposes constraints that stabilize particular conformations while preventing others from forming. As thebond energyof a covalent disulfide bridge is higher than the energy of acoordinate bondor hydrophobic interaction, greater numbers of disulfide bridges lead to higher energies required for proteindenaturation. Disulfide bonds often serve to stabilize protein structures in the more oxidizing conditions of the extracellular environment.[119]Within thecytoplasm, disulfide bonds may instead be reduced (i.e. in -SH form) to their constituent cysteine residues bythioredoxins.[120]
Many important cellular enzymes use prosthetic groups ending with sulfhydryl (-SH) moieties to handle reactions involving acyl-containing biochemicals: two common examples from basic metabolism arecoenzyme Aandalpha-lipoic acid.[121]Cysteine-related metaboliteshomocysteineandtaurineare other sulfur-containing amino acids that are similar in structure, but not coded byDNA, and are not part of theprimary structureof proteins, take part in various locations of mammalian physiology.[122][123]Two of the 13 classical vitamins,biotinandthiamine, contain sulfur, and serve as cofactors to several enzymes.[124][125]In intracellular chemistry, sulfur operates as a carrier of reducing hydrogen and its electrons for cellular repair of oxidation. Reducedglutathione, a sulfur-containing tripeptide, is a reducing agent through its sulfhydryl (–SH) moiety derived fromcysteine.
Methanogenesis, the route to most of the world's methane, is a multistep biochemical transformation ofcarbon dioxide. This conversion requires several organosulfur cofactors. These includecoenzyme M,CH3SCH2CH2SO−3, the immediate precursor tomethane.[126]

## Metalloproteins and inorganic cofactors
Metalloproteins—in which the active site is a transition metal ion (or metal-sulfide cluster) often coordinated by sulfur atoms of cysteine residues[127]—are essential components of enzymes involved in electron transfer processes. Examples includeplastocyanin(Cu2+) andnitrous oxide reductase(Cu–S). The function of these enzymes is dependent on the fact that the transition metal ion can undergoredox reactions. Other examples include many zinc proteins,[128]as well asiron–sulfur clusters. Most pervasive are theferrodoxins, which serve as electron shuttles in cells. In bacteria, the importantnitrogenaseenzymes contain an Fe–Mo–S cluster and is acatalystthat performs the important function ofnitrogen fixation, converting atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia that can be used by microorganisms and plants to make proteins, DNA, RNA, alkaloids, and the other organic nitrogen compounds necessary for life.[129]
Sulfur is also present inmolybdenum cofactor.[130]

## Deficiency
In humansmethionineis anessential amino acid;cysteineis conditionally essential and may be synthesized from non-essentialserinevia sulfur salvaged from methionine. Sulfur deficiency is uncommon due to the ubiquity of cysteine and methionine in food.[citation needed]
Isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency is a rare, fatal genetic disease caused by mutations tosulfite oxidase, which is needed to metabolize sulfites to sulfates.[131]

## Precautions
Though elemental sulfur is only minimally absorbed through the skin and is of low toxicity to humans, inhalation of sulfur dust or contact with eyes or skin may cause irritation. Excessive ingestion of sulfur can cause a burning sensation or diarrhea,[134]and cases of life-threatening metabolic acidosis have been reported after patients deliberately consumed sulfur as a folk remedy.[135][136]

## Toxicity of sulfur compounds
When sulfur burns in air, it producessulfur dioxide. In water, this gas produces sulfurous acid and sulfites; sulfites are antioxidants that inhibit growth of aerobic bacteria and a usefulfood additivein small amounts. At high concentrations these acids harm thelungs,eyes, or othertissues.[137]In organisms without lungs such as insects, sulfite in high concentration preventsrespiration.[138]
Sulfur trioxide(made by catalysis from sulfur dioxide) andsulfuric acidare similarly highly acidic and corrosive in the presence of water. Concentrated sulfuric acid is a strong dehydrating agent that can strip available water molecules and water components from sugar and organic tissue.[139]
The burning ofcoaland/orpetroleumby industry andpower plantsgenerates sulfur dioxide (SO2) that reacts with atmospheric water and oxygen to producesulfurous acid(H2SO3).[140]These acids are components ofacid rain, lowering thepHofsoiland freshwater bodies, sometimes resulting in substantial damage to theenvironmentandchemical weatheringof statues and structures. Fuel standards increasingly require that fuel producers extract sulfur fromfossil fuelsto prevent acid rain formation. This extracted and refined sulfur represents a large portion of sulfur production. In coal-fired power plants,flue gasesare sometimes purified. More modern power plants that usesynthesis gasextract the sulfur before they burn the gas.
Hydrogen sulfideis about one-half astoxicashydrogen cyanide, and intoxicates by the same mechanism (inhibition of the respiratory enzymecytochrome oxidase),[141]though hydrogen sulfide is less likely to cause sudden poisonings from small inhaled amounts (near itspermissible exposure limit(PEL) of 20 ppm) because of its disagreeable odor.[142]However, its presence in ambient air at concentration over 100–150 ppm quickly deadens the sense of smell,[143]and a victim may breathe increasing quantities without noticing until severe symptoms cause death. Dissolvedsulfideandhydrosulfidesalts are toxic by the same mechanism.

## Further reading
Sigel, Astrid; Freisinger, Eva; Sigel, Roland K.O., eds. (2020).Transition Metals and Sulfur: A Strong Relationship for Life. Guest Editors Martha E Sosa Torres and Peter M.H.Kroneck. Berlin/Boston: de Gruyter. pp. xlv+455.ISBN978-3-11-058889-7.