## Summer Olympic Games
TheSummer Olympic Games, also known as theSummer Olympicsor theGames of the Olympiad, are a major internationalmulti-sport eventnormally held once every four years. Theinaugural Gamestook place in 1896 inAthens, then part of theKingdom of Greece, and the most recent was held in2024inParis, France. This was the first international multi-sport event of its kind, organised by theInternational Olympic Committee(IOC) founded byPierre de Coubertin.[1]The tradition of awarding medals began in1904; in eachOlympicevent,gold medalsare awarded for first place,silver medalsfor second place, andbronze medalsfor third place. TheWinter Olympic Gameswere created out of the success of the Summer Olympic Games, which are regarded as the largest and most prestigious multi-sport international event in the world.
The Summer Olympics have increased in scope from a 42-event competition programme in 1896 with fewer than 250 male competitors from 14 nations, to 339 events in 2021 (2020 Summer Olympics) with 11,319 competitors (almost half of whom were women) from 206 nations. The Games have been held in nineteen countries over five continents: four times in theUnited States(1904,1932,1984, and1996), three times inGreat Britain(1908,1948, and2012) and inFrance(1900,1924, and2024), twice each inGreece(1896and2004),Germany(1936and1972),Australia(1956and2000), andJapan(1964and2020), and once each inSweden(1912),Belgium(1920), theNetherlands(1928),Finland(1952),Italy(1960),Mexico(1968),Canada(1976),Russia(1980),South Korea(1988),Spain(1992),China(2008), andBrazil(2016).
Londonand Paris have hosted three times, whileLos Angeles, Athens, andTokyohave each hosted twice; Los Angeles will host the Games for the third time in2028.[2]Only three countries have won at least one medal in every Summer Olympic Games: Australia, France and Great Britain. Only Great Britain has won at least a gold medal in every edition. The United States leads theall-time medal count for the Summer Olympicsand has topped themedal tableon 19 separate occasions, followed by the USSR (seven times, including the 1992 'Unified Team'), and France, Great Britain, Germany and China (once each).

## Hosting
TheUnited Stateshas hosted the Summer Olympic Games four times: the1904 GamesinSt. Louis,Missouri; the1932and1984Games inLos Angeles,California, and the1996 GamesinAtlanta,Georgia. The2028 Gamesin Los Angeles will mark the fifth occasion on which the Summer Olympics have been hosted by the U.S.
In1924, Paris became the first city to host the Summer Olympics twice, while in2012, London became the first to host three times. Paris hosted for the third time in2024, while Los Angeles will do so in 2028. Tokyo (1964and2020) and Athens (1896and2004, excluding1906) have each hosted two Summer Olympic Games.
Australia,Germany,GreeceandJapanhave all hosted the Summer Olympics twice (with Australia hosting for the third time in2032). Tokyo was the first city outside the predominantlyEnglish-speakingandEuropeannations to have hosted twice;[3]it is also the largest city ever to have hosted,having grown considerably since 1964. The other countries to have hosted the Summer Olympics areBelgium,Brazil,Canada,China,Finland,Italy,Mexico,Netherlands,South Korea,Soviet Union,Spain, andSweden, with each of these countries having hosted on one occasion.
Asiahas hosted four times: in Tokyo (1964and2020),Seoul(1988), andBeijing(2008).
The2016 GamesinRio de Janeiro, Brazil, were the first Summer Olympics to be held inSouth Americaand the first that was held completely during the local "winter" season. The only two countries in theSouthern Hemisphereto have hosted have been Australia (1956,2000, and again in2032) and Brazil (2016), withAfricahaving yet to host any Summer Olympics.
Stockholm, Sweden, has hosted events at two Summer Olympics, having been the sole host of the1912 Gameswhile hosting theequestrian eventsfor the1956 Summer Olympics(which quarantine regulations prevented from being held inMelbourne, Australia).[4]Amsterdam, Netherlands, has also hosted events at two Summer Olympic Games, having been the sole host of the1928 Gameswhile hosting two of thesailing racesat the1920 Summer Olympics. At the2008 Summer Olympics,Hong Kongprovided the venues for theequestrian events, which took place inSha TinandKwu Tung.
Hosting the Games requires and accelerates large investments in city infrastructure.[5]The Games now play a key role in city leaders' plans to strengthen their cities' global integration and economic competitiveness.[5]

## Early years
TheInternational Olympic Committee(IOC) was founded in 1894 whenPierre de Coubertin, a Frenchpedagogueand historian, sought to promote international understanding through sporting competition. The first edition of The Olympic Games was held inAthens in 1896and attracted just 245 competitors, of whom more than 200 were Greek, and only 14 countries were represented. Nevertheless, no international events of this magnitude had been organised before. Female athletes were not allowed to compete, though one woman,Stamata Revithi, ran the marathon course on her own, saying, "If the committee doesn't let me compete, I will go after them regardless".[6]Women first participated officially in the 1900 Paris Games, with 22 women competing in five sports. Female participation has increased dramatically since then, with nearly half of the athletes in recent Games being women.[1]
The1896 Summer Olympics, officially known as the Games of the Olympiad, was an internationalmulti-sport eventwhich was celebrated inAthens, Greece, from 6 to 15 April 1896. It was the first Olympic Games held in themodern era. About 100,000 people attended for the opening of the games. The athletes came from 14 nations, with most coming from Greece. AlthoughGreecehad the most athletes, the U.S. finished with the most champions; 11 Americans placed first in their events vs. the 10 from Greece.[7]Ancient Greecewas the birthplace of the Olympic Games, consequently Athens was perceived to be an appropriate choice to stage the inaugural modern Games. It was unanimously chosen as the host city during a congress organised by Pierre de Coubertin in Paris, on 23 June 1894. The IOC was also established during this congress.
Despite many obstacles and setbacks, the 1896 Olympics were regarded as a great success. The Games had the largest international participation of any sporting event to that date.Panathinaiko Stadium, the first big stadium in the modern world, overflowed with the largest crowd ever to watch a sporting event.[8]The highlight for the Greeks was theMarathonvictory by their compatriotSpiridon Louis, a water carrier. He won in 2 hours, 58 minutes and 50 seconds, setting off wild celebrations at the stadium. The most successful competitor was GermanwrestlerandgymnastCarl Schuhmann, who won four gold medals.
Greek officials and the public were enthusiastic about the experience of hosting an Olympic Games. This feeling was shared by many of the athletes, who even demanded that Athens be the permanent Olympic host city. The IOC intended for subsequent Games to be rotated to various host cities around the world. Thesecond Olympicswas held in Paris.[9]
Four years later the1900 Summer Olympicsin Paris attracted more than four times as many athletes, including 20 women, who were allowed to officially compete for the first time, incroquet,golf,sailing, andtennis. The Games were integrated with theParis World's Fairand lasted over five months. It has been disputed which exact events wereOlympic, as some events were for professionals, some had restricted eligibility, and others lacked international competitors.
Tensions caused by theRusso–Japanese Warand the difficulty of travelling to St. Louis may have contributed to the fact that very few top-ranked athletes from outside the U.S. and Canada took part in the1904 Games, the first Games held outside Europe. The current three-medal format of gold, silver and bronze for first, second and third place was introduced at the 1904 Olympics.[10]
The "Second International Olympic Games in Athens", as they were called at the time, were held in 1906.[11]The IOC does not currently recognise these games as being official Olympic Games, although many historians do and credit the 1906 games with preventing the demise of the Olympics. The 1906 Athens games were the first of an alternating series of games to be held in Athens in even non-Olympic years, but the series failed to materialise. The games were more successful than the 1900 and 1904 games, with over 850 athletes competing, and contributed positively to the success of future games.
The1908 London Gamessaw numbers rise again, as well as the first running of the marathon over its now-standard distance of 42.195  km (26 miles 385 yards). The first Olympic Marathon in 1896 (a male-only race) was raced at a distance of 40  km (24 miles 85 yards). The new marathon distance was chosen to ensure that the race finished in front of the box occupied by the British royal family. Thus the marathon had been 40 km (24.9 mi) for the first games in 1896, but was subsequently varied by up to 2 km (1.2 mi) depending on local conditions such as street and stadium layout. At the six Olympic games between 1900 and 1920, the marathon was raced over six distances. The Games sawGreat Britainwinning 146 medals, 99 more than second-placedAmericans, its best result to this day.
At the end of the 1908 marathon, the Italian runnerDorando Pietriwas first to enter the stadium, but he was clearly in distress and collapsed of exhaustion before he could complete the event. He was helped over the finish line by concerned race officials and later disqualified for that. As compensation for the missing medal,Queen Alexandragave Pietri a gilded silver cup.Arthur Conan Doylewrote a special report about the race in theDaily Mail.[12]
The Games continued to grow, attracting 2,504 competitors, toStockholm in 1912, including the great all-rounderJim Thorpe, who won both thedecathlonand pentathlon. Thorpe had previously played a few games of baseball for a fee, and saw his medals stripped for this 'breach' ofamateurismafter complaints fromAvery Brundage. They were reinstated in 1983, 30 years after his death. The Games at Stockholm were the first to fulfil Pierre de Coubertin's original idea. For the first time since the Games started in 1896, all five inhabited continents were represented with athletes competing in the same stadium.
The scheduled1916 Summer Olympicswere to be held inBerlin, cancelled following the onset ofWorld War I.

## Interwar era
The1920 Antwerp Gamesin war-ravagedBelgiumwere a subdued affair, but again drew a record number of competitors. This record only stood until 1924, when theParis Gamesinvolved 3,000 competitors, the greatest of whom was Finnish runnerPaavo Nurmi. The "Flying Finn" won three team gold medals and the individual 1,500- and 5,000-metre runs, the latter two on the same day.[13]
Paris hosted the1924 Games, becoming the first two-time host city. The Games were the last held under the IOC presidency ofPierre de Coubertin, father of the modern Olympics, and saw the introduction of the Olympic mottoCitius, Altius, Fortius, theOlympic Village, and theWinter Olympicsas an “International Winter Sports Week.”
The1928 Amsterdam Gameswas notable for being the first games which allowed females to compete at track & field athletics, and benefited greatly from the general prosperity of the times alongside the first appearance ofsponsorshipof the games, from theCoca-Cola Company. The 1928 games saw the introduction of a standard medal design with the IOC, choosingGiuseppe Cassioli's depiction of Greek goddessNikewith a winner being carried by a crowd of people. This design was used up until 1972.
The1932 Los Angeles Gamesfeatured anOlympic Village[14]and victory podium for the first time.[15][16]
The1936 Berlin Gameswere seen by the German government as a golden opportunity to promote their ideology. The rulingNazi Partycommissioned film-makerLeni Riefenstahlto film the games. The result,Olympia, was widely considered to be a masterpiece, despite the infusion ofAdolf Hitler's theories ofAryanracial superiority. Individually, African-American sprinter and long jumperJesse Owenswon four gold medals, while the host nation won the most gold and overall medals. The 1936 Berlin Games also saw the introduction of the Torch Relay.[17]
Due to World War II, the1940 Games(scheduled to be held in Tokyo and temporarily relocated toHelsinkiupon the outbreak ofthe war) were cancelled. The1944 Gameswere set to be held in London but were also cancelled; instead, London hosted the first games after the end of the war, in1948.

## After World War II
The first post-war Games were held in1948in London, with both Germany and Japan excluded.[18]Dutch sprinterFanny Blankers-Koenwon four gold medals on the track, emulating Owens' achievement in Berlin.[19]
At the1952 Helsinki Games, theUSSR teamcompeted for the first time and quickly emerged as one of the dominant teams, finishing second in the number of gold and overall medals won. Their immediate success might be explained by the advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete". The USSR entered teams of athletes who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but many of whom were in reality paid by the state to train on a full-time basis, hence violating amateur rules.[20][21][22][23][24]Finland made a legend of an amiableCzechoslovak Armylieutenant namedEmil Zátopek, who was intent on improving on his single gold and silver medals from 1948. Having first won both the 10,000- and 5,000-metre races, he also entered the marathon, despite having never previously raced at that distance. Pacing himself by chatting with the other race leaders, Zátopek led from about halfway, slowly dropping the remaining contenders to win by two and a half minutes, and completed a trio of wins.[25]
The1956 Melbourne Games, the first in theSouthern Hemisphere, were largely successful, with the exception of awater polo matchbetweenHungaryand the Soviet Union, which ended in a pitched battle between the teams on account of theSoviet invasion of Hungary.[26]The equestrian events were held in Stockholm because of afoot-and-mouth diseaseoutbreak in Britain at the time and the strictquarantinelaws of Australia.
At the1960 Rome Games, a young light-heavyweight boxer named Cassius Clay, later known asMuhammad Ali, arrived on the scene. Ali would later throw his gold medal away in disgust after being refused service in awhites-onlyrestaurant in his home town ofLouisville, Kentucky.[27]He was awarded a new medal 36 years later at the1996 Olympicsin Atlanta.[28]Other notable performers in 1960 includedWilma Rudolph, a gold medallist in the 100 metres, 200 metres, and 4 × 100 metres relay events.[29]
The1964 Tokyo Gameswere the first to be held in Asia and to be broadcast worldwide on television, enabled by the recent advent of communication satellites.[30]These Games marked a turning point in the global visibility and popularity of the Olympics and are credited for heralding the modern age of telecommunications.Judodebuted as an official sport, and Dutch judokaAnton Geesinkcaused a stir when he won the final of the open weight division, defeatingAkio Kaminagain front of his home crowd.[31]
Performances at the1968 Gamesin Mexico City were affected by the altitude of the host city.[32]These Games introduced the now-universalFosbury flop, a technique which won American high jumperDick Fosburythe gold medal.[33]In the medal award ceremony for the men's 200-metre race,black AmericanathletesTommie Smith(gold medal winner) andJohn Carlos(bronze medal winner) took a stand forcivil rightsby raising theirblack-gloved fistsand wearing black socks in lieu of shoes.[34]The two athletes were subsequently expelled from the Games by the IOC.Věra Čáslavská, in protest against the1968 Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia, and the controversial decision by the judges on thebalance beamandfloor, turned her head down and away from theSoviet flagwhile thenational anthemwas played during the medal ceremony.[35]She returned home as a heroine of the Czechoslovak people but was made an outcast by the Soviet-dominated government.
Politics again intervened at the1972 Gamesin Munich, but this time withlethal consequences. A Palestinian terrorist group namedBlack Septemberinvaded the Olympic village and broke into the apartment of theIsraeli delegation. They killed two Israelis and held nine others as hostages, demanding that Israel release numerous prisoners. When the Israeli government refused the terrorists' demands, the situation developed into a tense stand-off while negotiations continued. Eventually, the captors, still holding their hostages, were offered safe passage and taken to an airport, where they were ambushed by German security forces. In the ensuing firefight, 15 people were killed, including the nine captive Israeli athletes and five of the terrorists.[36]After much debate, the decision was taken to continue the Games, but the proceedings were understandably dominated by these events.[37]Some memorable athletic achievements did occur during these Games, notably the winning of a then-record seven gold medals by United States swimmerMark Spitz, Finland'sLasse Viréntaking back-to-back gold medals in the 5,000 metres and 10,000 metres, and the winning of three gold medals by Soviet gymnastic starOlga Korbut, who achieved a historic backflip off thehigh bar. In thefinal of the men's basketball, theUnited Stateslost to theSoviet Unionin what is widely considered as the most controversial game in international basketball history.[38]In a close-fought match, the U.S. team appeared to have won by a score of 50–49. However, the final three seconds of the game were replayed three times by judges until the Soviet team came out on top and claimed a 51–50 victory.[39]Ultimately the U.S. team refused to accept their silver medals.
There was no such tragedy at the1976 Montreal Games, but bad planning and fraud led to the cost of these Games far exceeding the budget. Costing $1.5 billion (equivalent to $7.92 billion in 2025),[40][41]the 1976 Summer Games were the most expensive in Olympic history (until the2014 Winter Olympics) and it seemed, for a time, that the Olympics might no longer be a viable financial proposition. In retrospect, it is believed that contractors (suspected of being members of the Montreal Mafia) skimmed large sums of money from all levels of contracts while also profiting from the substitution of cheaper building materials of lesser quality, which may have contributed to the delays, poor construction, and excessive costs. In 1988, one such contractor, Giuseppe Zappia "was cleared of fraud charges that resulted from his work on Olympic facilities after two key witnesses died before testifying at his trial".[42]The 1976 Games were boycotted by many African nations as a protest againsta recent tourofapartheid-run South Africa by theNew Zealand national rugby union team.[43]Romanian gymnastNadia Comănecimade history when she won the women's individual all-around gold medal with two of four possible perfect scores. She won two other individual events, with two perfect scores in the balance beam and all perfect scores in the uneven bars.[44]Lasse Virén repeated his double gold in the 5,000 and 10,000 metres, making him the first athlete to ever win the distance double twice.[45]

## End of the 20th century
Following the Soviet Union's 1979 invasion ofAfghanistan, 66 nations, including the United States, Canada, West Germany, and Japan,boycottedthe1980 Gamesheld in Moscow. Eighty nations were represented at the Moscow Games – the smallest number since 1956. The boycott contributed to the 1980 Games being a less publicised and less competitive affair, which was dominated by the host country.
According to British journalistAndrew Jennings, aKGBcolonel stated that the agency's officers had posed as anti-doping authorities from the IOC to underminedoping testsand that Soviet athletes were "rescued with [these] tremendous efforts".[46]On the topic of the1980 Summer Olympics, an Australian study in 1989 said "There is hardly a medal winner at the Moscow Games, certainly not a gold medal winner, who is not on one sort of drug or another: usually several kinds. The Moscow Games might as well have been called the Chemists' Games."[46][47]
Documents obtained in 2016 revealed the Soviet Union's plans for a statewide doping system in track and field in preparation for the1984 Summer Olympicsin Los Angeles. Dated prior to the country's decision to boycott the Games, the document detailed the existing steroids operations of the programme, along with suggestions for further enhancements.[48]The communication, directed to the Soviet Union's head of track and field, was prepared by Dr. Sergei Portugalov of the Institute for Physical Culture. Portugalov was also one of the main figures involved in the implementation of the Russian doping programme prior to the 2016 Summer Olympics.[48]
In 1984, the Soviet Union and13 Soviet alliesretaliated byboycottingthe1984 Summer Olympicsin Los Angeles.RomaniaandYugoslavianotably are the only two countries from the Eastern Bloc that did attend the 1984 Olympics. These games were perhaps the first games of a new era to make a profit. Although a boycott led by the Soviet Union depleted the field in certain sports, 140 National Olympic Committees took part, which was a record at the time.[49]The Games were also the first time mainland China (People's Republic) participated.
The1988 Games, in Seoul, was very well planned, but the games were tainted when many of the athletes, most notably men's 100 metres winnerBen Johnson, failed mandatory drug tests. Despite splendid drug-free performances by many individuals, the number of people who failed screenings for performance-enhancing chemicals overshadowed the games.
The1992 Barcelona Gamesfeatured the admittance of players from one of the North American top leagues, theNBA, exemplified by, but not limited to, U.S. basketball's "Dream Team". The 1992 games also saw the reintroduction to the Games of several smaller European states which had beenannexed into the Soviet Unionduring World War II. At these games, gymnastVitaly Scherboset an inaugural medal record of five individual gold medals at a Summer Olympics and equalled the inaugural record set byEric Heidenat the1980 Winter Olympics.
By then the process of choosing a location for the Games had become a commercial concern; there were widespread allegations of corruption potentially affecting the IOC's decision process.
At the Atlanta1996 Summer Olympics, one highlight was200 metresrunnerMichael Johnsonsmashing the world record in front of a home crowd. Canadians savouredDonovan Baileyrecording a gold medal run in the 100-metre dash. There were also emotional scenes, such as when Muhammad Ali, clearly affected byParkinson's disease, lit the Olympic torch and received a replacement medal for the one he had discarded in 1960. There were 8.3 million tickets sold for events at this Olympics, a record broken only in 2024. The atmosphere at the Games was marred, however, when abomb explodedduring the celebration in Centennial Olympic Park. In June 2003, the principal suspect in this bombing,Eric Robert Rudolph, was arrested.
The2000 Summer Olympics, held in Sydney, Australia, showcased individual performances by local favouritesIan Thorpein the pool andCathy Freeman, anIndigenous Australianwhose triumph in the400 metresunited a packed stadium. BritonSteve Redgravewon a rowing gold medal in an unprecedented fifth consecutive Olympics, andEric "the Eel" Moussambani, a swimmer from Equatorial Guinea, received wide media coverage when he completed the 100-metre freestyle swim in by far the slowest time in Olympic history. He nevertheless won the heat as both his opponents had been disqualified for false starts. His female compatriotPaula Barila Bolopaalso received media attention for her record-slow and struggling but courageous performance. The Sydney Games also saw the first appearance of a joint North and South Korean contingent at the opening ceremonies, though they competed in all events as different teams. Controversy occurred in the women's artistic gymnastics when the vaulting horse was set to the wrong height during the all-around competition.

## Start of the 21st century
In2004, the Olympic Games returned to their birthplace in Athens, Greece. At least $7.2 billion was spent on the 2004 Games, including $1.5 billion on security.Michael Phelpswon his first Olympic medals, tallying six gold and two bronze medals.Pyrros Dimas, winning a bronze medal, became the most decorated weightlifter of all time with four Olympic medals, three gold and one bronze. Although unfounded reports of potential terrorism drove crowds away from the preliminary competitions at the first weekend of the Olympics (14–15 August 2004), attendance picked up as the Games progressed. A third of the tickets failed to sell,[50]but ticket sales still topped figures from the Seoul and Barcelona Olympics (1988and1992). IOC PresidentJacques Roggecharacterised Greece's organisation as outstanding and its security precautions as flawless.[51]All 202 NOCs participated at the Athens Games with over 11,000 participants.
The2008 Summer Olympicswas held in Beijing, People's Republic of China. Several new events were held, including the new discipline ofBMXfor both men and women. Women competed in thesteeplechasefor the first time. The fencing programme was expanded to include all six events for both men and women; previously, women had not been able to compete in team foil or sabre events, although women's team épée and men's team foil were dropped for these Games. Marathon swimming events were added, over the distance of 10 km (6.2 mi). Also, the doubles events in table tennis were replaced by team events.[52]American swimmer Michael Phelps set a record for gold medals at a single Games with eight, and tied the record of most gold medals by a single competitor previously held by both Eric Heiden and Vitaly Scherbo. Another notable star of the Games was Jamaican sprinterUsain Bolt, who became the first male athlete ever to set world records in the finals of both the 100 and 200 metres in the same Games. Equestrian events were held in Hong Kong.
London held the2012 Summer Olympics, becoming the first city to host the Olympic Games three times. In his closing address, Jacques Rogge described the Games as "Happy and glorious". The host nation won 29 gold medals, the best haul for Great Britain since the1908 Gamesin London. The United States returned to the top of the medal table after China dominated in 2008. The IOC had removedbaseballandsoftballfrom the 2012 programme. The London Games were successful on a commercial level because they were the first in history to completely sell out every ticket, with as many as one million applications for 40,000 tickets for both the Opening Ceremony and the 100m Men's Sprint Final. Such was the demand for tickets to all levels of each event that there was controversy over seats being set aside for sponsors and National Delegations which went unused in the early days. A system of reallocation was put in place so the empty seats were filled throughout the Games.

## Recent Games
Rio de Janeiroin Brazil hosted the2016 Summer Olympics, becoming the first South American city to host the Olympics, the second Olympic host city in Latin America, afterMexico Cityin1968, as well as the third city in the Southern Hemisphere to host the Olympics after Melbourne, Australia, in1956andSydney, Australia, in2000. The preparation for these Games was overshadowed bycontroversies, including political instability and an economic crisis in the host country, health and safety concerns surrounding theZika virus, and significant pollution in theGuanabara Bay. However, these concerns were superseded by astate-sponsored doping scandalinvolvingRussian athletes at the Winter Olympics held two years earlier, which affected the participation of its athletes in these Games.[53]
The2020 Summer Olympicswere originally scheduled to take place from 24 July to 9 August 2020 in Tokyo, Japan. The city was the fifth in history to host the Games twice and the first Asian city to have this title. Due to theCOVID-19 pandemic, the then-Japanese Prime MinisterShinzo Abe, the IOC and the Tokyo Organising Committee announced that the 2020 Games were to be delayed until 2021, marking the first time that the Olympic Games have been postponed. This was the first time since 1900 that the games were not held in aleap year, and were instead hosted in anon-leap year. Unlike previous Olympics, these Games took placewithout spectatorsbecause of concerns over COVID-19 and a state of emergency imposed in the host city.[54][55][56]Nevertheless, the Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games featured many memorable moments and feats of technical excellence. One star of the Games, U.S. gymnastSimone Biles, gracefully bowed out to focus on her mental health, but later returned to claim an individual bronze medal.[57]Norway'sKarsten Warholmsmashed his own world record in the 400m hurdles.[58]
The2024 Summer Olympicswere held in Paris, France, making it the second city after London to host the Summer Olympics three times (the other times being1900and1924, marking a centenary since the latter). This is the first of any Olympic Games after the pandemic to allow spectators to attend. In a first, the opening ceremonies were staged outside the main stadium with the athletes parading on boats along theRiver Seine. Following this, the open water swimming competitions also occurred in the Seine.[59]

## Future Games
The2028 Summer Olympicswill be held in Los Angeles, California, United States, making it the third city (after Paris (1900,1924,2024) and London (1908,1948,2012)) to host the Games three times (the other times being1932and1984), with the U.S. hosting the Summer Olympics for the fifth time.[60]
The2032 Summer Olympicswill be held in Brisbane, Australia, which is the third city to host the Games in Australia and the fourth south of theequator.[61]

## Sports
There has been a total of 42 sports, spanning 55 disciplines, included in the Olympic programme at one point or another in the history of the Games. The schedule has comprised 33 sports for the recent Summer Olympics (2020), with 32 sports planned for the next Summer Olympics (2024).
The various Olympic Sports federations are grouped under a common umbrella association, called theAssociation of Summer Olympic International Federations(ASOIF).
Current sportNo longer included

## Qualification
Qualification rules for each of the Olympic sports are set by theInternational Sports Federation(IF) that governs that sport's international competition.[62]
For individual sports, competitors typically qualify by attaining a certain place in a major international event or on the IF's ranking list. There is a general rule that a maximum of three individual athletes may represent each nation per competition. National Olympic Committees (NOCs) may enter a limited number of qualified competitors in each event, and the NOC decides which qualified competitors to select as representatives in each event if more have attained the benchmark than can be entered.[63]
Nations most often qualify teams for team sports through continental qualifying tournaments, in which each continental association is given a certain number of spots in the Olympic tournament. Each nation may be represented by no more than one team per competition; a team consists of just two people in some sports.
SomeNational Olympic Committees, whose nations are underrepresented after qualifications, may be granted wild card quotas, which are termedUniversality Places, in some eligible sports.[64]

## Popularity of Olympic sports
The IOC divides Summer Olympic sports into five categories (A – E) based on popularity, gauged by six criteria: television viewing figures (40%), internet popularity (20%), public surveys (15%), ticket requests (10%), press coverage (10%), and number of national federations (5%). The category of a sport determines the share of Olympic revenue received by that sport's International Federation.[65][66]Sports that were new to the 2016 Olympics (rugby and golf) have been placed in Category E.
The current categories are:
aAquatics encompasses artistic swimming, diving, swimming, and water polo.

## All-time medal table
The table below uses official data provided by theIOC.
status after the 2024 Summer Olympics

## Medal leaders by year
Number of occurrences

## List of Summer Olympic Games
The IOC has never decided which events of the early Games were "Olympic" and which were not.[67]The founder of the modern Olympics, Pierre de Coubertin, ceded that determination to the organisers of those Games.