## Supernova
Asupernova(pl.:supernovae) is a powerful and luminousexplosionof astar. A supernova occurs during the lastevolutionary stagesof amassive star, or when awhite dwarfis triggered into runawaynuclear fusion. The original object, called theprogenitor, either collapses to aneutron starorblack hole, or is completely destroyed to form adiffuse nebula. The peak opticalluminosityof a supernova can be comparable to that of an entiregalaxybefore fading over several weeks or months.
It is expected that supernovae in our galaxy occur on average once every 61 years, although the last to be observed wasKepler's Supernovain 1604.SN 1987Aoccurred in theLarge Magellanic Cloud, a satellite of our galaxy, in 1987.  Several thousand supernovae are typically seen in distant galaxies every year.
Theoretical studies indicate that most supernovae are triggered by one of two basic mechanisms: the sudden re-ignition of nuclear fusion in awhite dwarf, or the suddengravitational collapseof a massive star'score.
Supernovae can expel severalsolar massesof material at speeds up to several percent of thespeed of light. This drives an expandingshock waveinto the surroundinginterstellar medium, sweeping up an expanding shell of gas and dust observed as a supernova remnant. Supernovae are a major source ofelementsin the interstellar medium fromoxygentorubidium. The expanding shock waves of supernovae can trigger theformation of new stars. Supernovae are a major source ofcosmic rays. They might also producegravitational waves.

## Occurrence
The first supernovae to be studied by astronomical methods wereTycho's Supernovain 1572 andKepler's Supernovain 1604, both of which were  in theMilky Wayand were visible to thenaked eye. Analysis of the historical record suggests that, apart from telescope findings, fewer than 10 supernovae have been seen over the last 2,000 years.[1]: 6
Observations of recentsupernova remnantswithin the Milky Way, coupled with studies of supernovae in other galaxies, suggest that these powerful stellar explosions occur in our galaxy approximately 1.6 to 4.6 times per century on average.[2][3]
In 1987, the supernovaSN 1987Aappeared in theLarge Magellanic Cloud, asatellite galaxyof the Milky Way in an easily studied part of the sky. Many astronomical observations were made on SN 1987A, including the only measurements of astronomicalneutrinosother than the Sun's. The event was attributed to an explosion of ablue supergiant star.[4]

## Etymology
The wordsupernovahas thepluralformsupernovae(/-viː/) orsupernovasand is often abbreviated as SN or SNe. It is derived from theLatinwordnova, meaning'new', which refers to what appears to be a temporary new bright star. Adding the prefix "super-" distinguishes supernovae from ordinary novae, which are far less luminous. The wordsupernovawas coined byWalter BaadeandFritz Zwicky, who began using it in astrophysics lectures in 1931.[5][6]Its first use in a journal article came the following year in a publication byKnut Lundmark, who may have coined it independently.[6][7]

## Observation history
Compared to a star's entire history, the visual appearance of a supernova is very brief, sometimes spanning several months, so that the chances of observing one with the naked eye are roughly once in a lifetime. Only a tiny fraction of the 100billionstars in a typicalgalaxyhave the capacity to become a supernova, the ability being restricted to those having high mass and those in rare kinds ofbinary star systemswith at least onewhite dwarf.[8]

## Early observations
A rock carving in theBurzahamaregion ofKashmir, dated to4500±1000BCshowing what might be nova HB9[9]is the earliest of many claimed but unverifiable records of supernovae by prehistoric people.[10]The first widely recorded supernova wasSN 1006, observed in AD 1006 in the constellation ofLupus.[11]This event was described by observers in China, Japan, Iraq, Egypt and Europe.[12][13][14]
The supernovaSN 1054, which produced theCrab Nebula, was recorded by Chinese astronomers in AD 1054.[15]SupernovaeSN 1572andSN 1604, the latest Milky Way supernovae to be observed with the naked eye, had a notable influence on the development of astronomy inEuropebecause they were used to argue against theAristotelianidea that the universe beyond the Moon and planets was static and unchanging.[16]Johannes Keplerbegan observing SN 1604 at its peak on 17 October 1604, and continued to make estimates of its brightness until it faded from naked eye view a year later.[17]It was the second supernova to be observed in a generation, afterTycho Braheobserved SN 1572 inCassiopeia.[18]
There is some evidence that the youngest known supernova in our galaxy,G1.9+0.3, occurred in the late 19th century, considerably more recently thanCassiopeia Afrom around 1680.[19]Neither was noted at the time. In the case of G1.9+0.3, highextinctionfrom dust along the plane of the galactic disk could have dimmed the event sufficiently for it to go unnoticed. The situation for Cassiopeia A is less clear; infraredlight echoeshave been detected showing that it was not in a region of especially high extinction.[20]

## Telescope findings
With the development of the astronomicaltelescope, observation and discovery of fainter and more distant supernovae became possible. The first such observation was ofSN 1885Ain theAndromeda Galaxy. A decade later, two further supernovae,SN 1895AandSN 1895B, were discovered inNGC 4424andNGC 5253respectively.[29][30]Early work on what was originally believed to be simply a new category ofnovaewas performed during the 1920s. These were variously called "upper-class Novae", "Hauptnovae", or "giant novae".[31]The name "supernovae" is thought to have been coined byWalter BaadeandFritz Zwickyin lectures atCaltechin 1931. It was used, as "super-Novae", in a journal paper published byKnut Lundmarkin 1933,[32]and in a 1934 paper by Baade and Zwicky.[33]By 1938, the hyphen was no longer used and the modern name was in use.[34]
Rudolph Minkowskiand Fritz Zwicky developed the modern supernova classification scheme beginning in 1941.[35]During the 1960s, astronomers found that the maximum intensities of supernovae could be used asstandard candles, hence indicators of astronomical distances.[36]Some of the most distant supernovae observed in 2003 appeared dimmer than expected. This supports the view that the expansion of theuniverse is accelerating.[37]Techniques were developed for reconstructing supernovae events that have no written records of being observed. The date of the Cassiopeia A supernova event was determined from light echoes offnebulae,[38]while the age of supernova remnantRX J0852.0-4622was estimated from temperature measurements[39]and thegamma rayemissions from the radioactive decay of44Ti.[40]
The most luminous supernova ever recorded isASASSN-15lh, at a distance of 3.82gigalight-years. It was first detected in June 2015 and peaked at 570 billionL☉, which is twice thebolometric luminosityof any other known supernova.[42]The nature of this supernova is debated and several alternative explanations, such as tidal disruption of a star by a black hole, have been suggested.[43]
SN 2013fswas recorded three hours after the supernova event on 6 October 2013, by theIntermediate Palomar Transient Factory. This is among the earliest supernovae caught after detonation, and it is the earliest for which spectra have been obtained, beginning six hours after the actual explosion. The star is located in aspiral galaxynamedNGC 7610, 160 million light-years away in the constellation of Pegasus.[44][45]
The supernovaSN 2016gkgwas detected by amateur astronomer Victor Buso fromRosario, Argentina, on 20 September 2016.[46][47]It was the first time that the initial "shock breakout" from an optical supernova had been observed.[46]The progenitor star has been identified inHubble Space Telescopeimages from before its collapse. AstronomerAlex Filippenkonoted: "Observations of stars in the first moments they begin exploding provide information that cannot be directly obtained in any other way."[46]

## Discovery programs
Because supernovae are relatively rare events within a galaxy, occurring about three times a century in the Milky Way,[3]obtaining a good sample of supernovae to study requires regular monitoring of many galaxies. Today, amateur and professional astronomers are finding about two thousand every year, some when near maximum brightness, others on old astronomical photographs or plates. Supernovae in other galaxies cannot be predicted with any meaningful accuracy. Normally, when they are discovered, they are already in progress.[48]To use supernovae asstandard candlesfor measuring distance, observation of their peak luminosity is required. It is therefore important to discover them well before they reach their maximum.Amateur astronomers, who greatly outnumber professional astronomers, have played an important role in finding supernovae, typically by looking at some of the closer galaxies through anoptical telescopeand comparing them to earlier photographs.[49]
Toward the end of the 20th century, astronomers increasingly turned to computer-controlled telescopes andCCDsfor hunting supernovae. While such systems are popular with amateurs, there are also professional installations such as theKatzman Automatic Imaging Telescope.[50]TheSupernova Early Warning System(SNEWS) project uses a network ofneutrino detectorsto give early warning of a supernova in the Milky Way galaxy.[51][52]Neutrinosaresubatomic particlesthat are produced in great quantities by a supernova, and they are not significantly absorbed by the interstellar gas and dust of the galactic disk.[53]
Supernova searches fall into two classes: those focused on relatively nearby events and those looking farther away. Because of theexpansion of the universe, the distance to a remote object with a knownemission spectrumcan be estimated by measuring itsDoppler shift(orredshift); on average, more-distant objects recede with greater velocity than those nearby, and so have a higher redshift. Thus the search is split between high redshift and low redshift, with the boundary falling around a redshift range of z=0.1–0.3, where z is a dimensionless measure of the spectrum's frequency shift.[54]
High-redshift searches for supernovae usually involve the observation of supernova light curves. These are useful for standard or calibrated candles to generateHubble diagramsand make cosmological predictions. Supernova spectroscopy, used to study the physics and environments of supernovae, is more practical at low than at high redshift.[55][56]Low redshift observations also anchor the low-distance end of theHubble curve, which is a plot of distance versus redshift for visible galaxies.[57][58]
As survey programmes rapidly increase the number of detected supernovae, collated collections of observations (light decay curves, astrometry, pre-supernova observations, spectroscopy) have been assembled. The Pantheon data set, assembled in 2018, detailed 1048 supernovae.[59]In 2021, this data set was expanded to 1701 light curves for 1550 supernovae taken from 18 different surveys, a 50% increase in under 3 years.[60]

## Naming convention
Supernova discoveries are reported to theInternational Astronomical Union'sCentral Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams, which sends out a circular with the name it assigns to that supernova.[61]The name is formed from the prefixSN, followed by the year of discovery, suffixed with a one or two-letter designation. The first 26 supernovae of the year are designated with a capital letter fromAtoZ. Next, pairs of lower-case letters are used:aa,ab, and so on. Hence, for example,SN 2003Cdesignates the third supernova reported in the year 2003.[62]The last supernova of 2005, SN 2005nc, was the 367th (14 × 26 + 3 = 367). Since 2000, professional and amateur astronomers have been finding several hundred supernovae each year (572 in 2007, 261 in 2008, 390 in 2009; 231 in 2013).[63][64]
Historical supernovae are known simply by the year they occurred: SN 185, SN 1006, SN 1054, SN 1572 (calledTycho's Nova) and SN 1604 (Kepler's Star).[65]Since 1885 the additional letter notation has been used, even if there was only one supernova discovered that year (for example, SN 1885A, SN 1907A, etc.); this last happened with SN 1947A.SN, for SuperNova, is a standard prefix. Until 1987, two-letter designations were rarely needed; since 1988, they have been needed every year. Since 2016, the increasing number of discoveries has regularly led to the additional use of three-letter designations.[66]After zz comes aaa, then aab, aac, and so on. For example, the last supernova retained in the Asiago Supernova Catalogue when it was terminated on 31 December 2017 bears the designation SN 2017jzp.[64]

## Classification
Astronomers classify supernovae according to theirlight curvesand theabsorption linesof differentchemical elementsthat appear in theirspectra. If a supernova's spectrum contains lines ofhydrogen(known as theBalmer seriesin the visual portion of the spectrum) it is classifiedType II; otherwise it isType I. In each of these two types there are subdivisions according to the presence of lines from other elements or the shape of the light curve (a graph of the supernova's apparent magnitude as a function of time).[67][68]

## Type I
Type I supernovae are subdivided on the basis of their spectra, with Type Ia showing a strongionised siliconabsorption line. Type I supernovae without this strong line are classified as Type Ib and Ic, with Type Ib showing strong neutral helium lines and Type Ic lacking them. Historically, the light curves of Type I supernovae were seen as all broadly similar, too much so to make useful distinctions.[69]While variations in light curves have been studied, classification continues to be made on spectral grounds rather than light-curve shape.[68]
A small number of Type Ia supernovae exhibit unusual features, such as non-standard luminosity or broadened light curves, and these are typically categorised by referring to the earliest example showing similar features. For example, the sub-luminousSN 2008hais often referred to asSN 2002cx-like or class Ia-2002cx.[70]
A small proportion of Type Ic supernovae show highly broadened and blended emission lines which are taken to indicate very high expansion velocities for the ejecta. These have been classified as Type Ic-BL or Ic-bl.[71]
Calcium-rich supernovaeare a rare type of very fast supernova with unusually strong calcium lines in their spectra.[72][73]Models suggest they occur when material is accreted from ahelium-rich companion rather than ahydrogen-rich star. Because of helium lines in their spectra, they can resemble Type Ib supernovae, but are thought to have very different progenitors.[74]
Type Ien has been proposed to explain observations of the supernovaSN 2021yfj.[75]Having lost its outer layers of hydrogen, helium and carbon, the star, just before the explosion, released an unusual, hidden layer ofsilicon,sulfurandargon, elements that are not often seen in dying stars.[76]During the explosion, the material from the star'scorecollided with the gaseous shell, and the heat of the collision caused the silicon and sulfur layer to glow. The explosion showed that stars can be completely stripped down and still produce a brilliant explosion observable from very far distance. The discovery provided direct evidence of the long-theorized, but difficult to observe,internal structureofmassive stars.[76]In the type's name, "e" describes the position of the silicon/sulfur layer in the internal structure, while "n" signifies narrow emission lines.[75]

## Type II
The supernovae ofType IIcan also be sub-divided based on their spectra. While most Type II supernovae show very broademission lineswhich indicate expansion velocities of many thousands ofkilometres per second, some, such asSN 2005gl, have relatively narrow features in their spectra. These are called Type IIn, where the "n" stands for "narrow".[68]
A few supernovae, such as SN 1987K[78]andSN 1993J, appear to change types: they show lines of hydrogen at early times, but, over a period of weeks to months, become dominated by lines of helium. The term"Type IIb"is used to describe the combination of features normally associated with Type II and Type Ib.[68]
Type II supernovae with normal spectra dominated by broad hydrogen lines that remain for the life of the decline are classified on the basis of their light curves. The most common type shows a distinctive "plateau" in the light curve shortly after peak brightness where the visual luminosity stays relatively constant for several months before the decline resumes. These are called Type II-P referring to the plateau. Less common are Type II-L supernovae that lack a distinct plateau. The "L" signifies "linear" although the light curve is not actually a straight line.[68]
Supernovae that do not fit into the normal classifications are designated peculiar, or "pec".[68]

## Types III, IV and V
Zwicky defined additional supernovae types based on a very few examples that did not cleanly fit the parameters for Type I or Type II supernovae.SN 1961iinNGC 4303was the prototype and only member of the Type III supernova class, noted for its broad light curve maximum and broad hydrogen Balmer lines that were slow to develop in the spectrum.[69]SN 1961f inNGC 3003was the prototype and only member of the Type IV class, with a light curve similar to a Type II-P supernova, withhydrogen absorption linesbut weakhydrogen emission lines.[69]The Type V class was coined forSN 1961VinNGC 1058, an unusual faint supernova orsupernova impostorwith a slow rise to brightness, a maximum lasting many months, and an unusual emission spectrum. The similarity of SN 1961V to theEta CarinaeGreat Outburst was noted.[79]Supernovae in M101 (1909) and M83 (1923 and 1957) were also suggested as possible Type IV or Type V supernovae.[80]
These types would now all be treated as peculiar Type II supernovae (IIpec), of which many more examples have been discovered, although it is still debated whether SN 1961V was a true supernova following anLBVoutburst or an impostor.[69][81]

## Current models
Supernova type codes, as summarised in the table above, aretaxonomic: the type number is based on the light observed from the supernova, not necessarily its cause. For example, Type Ia supernovae are produced by runaway fusion ignited on degenerate white dwarf progenitors, while the spectrally similar Type Ib/c are produced from massive stripped progenitor stars by core collapse.

## Thermal runaway
A white dwarf star may accumulate sufficient material from a stellar companion to raise its core temperature enough toignitecarbon fusion, at which point it undergoesrunawaynuclear fusion, completely disrupting it. There are three avenues by which this detonation is theorised to happen: stableaccretionof material from a companion, the collision of two white dwarfs, or accretion that causes ignition in a shell that then ignites the core. The dominant mechanism by which Type Ia supernovae are produced remains unclear.[83]Despite this uncertainty in how Type Ia supernovae are produced, Type Ia supernovae have very uniform properties and are usefulstandard candlesover intergalactic distances. Some calibrations are required to compensate for the gradual change in properties or different frequencies of abnormal luminosity supernovae at high redshift, and for small variations in brightness identified by light curve shape or spectrum.[84][85]

## Normal Type Ia
There are several means by which a supernova of this type can form, but they share a common underlying mechanism. If acarbon-oxygenwhite dwarf accreted enough matter to reach theChandrasekhar limitof about 1.44solar masses[86](for a non-rotating star), then it would no longer be able to support the bulk of its mass throughelectron degeneracy pressure[87][88]and would begin to collapse. However, the current view is that this limit is not normally attained; increasing temperature and density inside the core ignite carbon fusion as the star approaches the limit (to within about 1%)[89]before collapse is initiated.[86]In contrast, for a core primarily composed of oxygen, neon and magnesium, the collapsing white dwarf will typically form aneutron star. In this case, only a fraction of the star's mass will be ejected during the collapse.[88]
Within a few seconds of the collapse process, a substantial fraction of the matter in the white dwarf undergoes nuclear fusion, releasing enough energy (1–2×1044J)[90]tounbindthe star in a supernova.[91]An outwardly expandingshock waveis generated, with matter reaching velocities on the order of 5,000–20,000km/s, or roughly 3% of the speed of light. There is also a significant increase in luminosity, reaching anabsolute magnitudeof −19.3 (or 5 billion times brighter than the Sun), with little variation.[92]
The model for the formation of this category of supernova is a close binary star system. The more massive of the two stars is the first toevolveoff themain sequence, and it expands to form ared giant. The two stars now share a common envelope, causing their mutual orbit to shrink. The giant star then sheds most of its envelope, losing mass until it can no longer continuenuclear fusion. At this point, it becomes a white dwarf star, composed primarily of carbon and oxygen.[93]Eventually, the secondary star also evolves off the main sequence to form a red giant. Matter from the giant is accreted by the white dwarf, causing the latter to increase in mass. The exact details of initiation and of the heavy elements produced in the catastrophic event remain unclear.[94]
Type Ia supernovae produce a characteristic light curve—the graph of luminosity as a function of time—after the event. This luminosity is generated by theradioactive decayof56Nithrough56Coto56Fe.[92]The peak luminosity of the light curve is extremely consistent across normal Type Ia supernovae, having a maximum absolute magnitude of about −19.3. This is because typical Type Ia supernovae arise from a consistent type of progenitor star by gradual mass acquisition, and explode when they acquire a consistent typical mass, giving rise to very similar supernova conditions and behaviour. This allows them to be used as a secondary[95]standard candle to measure the distance to their host galaxies.[96]
A second model for the formation of Type Ia supernovae involves the merger of two white dwarf stars, with the combined mass momentarily exceeding the Chandrasekhar limit.[97]This is sometimes referred to as the double-degenerate model, as both stars are degenerate white dwarfs. Due to the possible combinations of mass and chemical composition of the pair there is much variation in this type of event,[98]and, in many cases, there may be no supernova at all, in which case they will have a less luminous light curve than the more normal SN Type Ia.[99]

## Non-standard Type Ia
Abnormally bright Type Ia supernovae occur when the white dwarf already has a mass higher than the Chandrasekhar limit,[100]possibly enhanced further by asymmetry,[101]but the ejected material will have less than normal kinetic energy. This super-Chandrasekhar-mass scenario can occur, for example, when the extra mass is supported bydifferential rotation.[102]
There is no formal sub-classification for non-standard Type Ia supernovae. It has been proposed that a group of sub-luminous supernovae that occur when helium accretes onto a white dwarf should be classified asType Iax.[103][104]This type of supernova may not always completely destroy the white dwarf progenitor and could leave behind azombie star.[105]
One specific type of supernova originates from exploding white dwarfs, like Type Ia, but contains hydrogen lines in their spectra, possibly because the white dwarf is surrounded by an envelope of hydrogen-richcircumstellar material. These supernovae have been dubbedType Ia/IIn,Type Ian,Type IIaandType IIan.[106]
The quadruple starHD 74438, belonging to the open clusterIC 2391theVela constellation, has been predicted to become a non-standard Type Ia supernova.[107][108]

## Core collapse
Very massive stars can undergo core collapse when nuclear fusion becomes unable to sustain the core against its own gravity; passing this threshold is the cause of all types of supernova except Type Ia. The collapse may cause violent expulsion of the outer layers of the star resulting in a supernova. However, if the release of gravitational potential energy is insufficient, the star may instead collapse into ablack holeorneutron starwith little radiated energy.[109]
Core collapse can be caused by several different mechanisms: exceeding theChandrasekhar limit;electron capture;pair-instability; orphotodisintegration.[109][110][111]
The table below lists the known reasons for core collapse in massive stars, the types of stars in which they occur, their associated supernova type, and the remnant produced. Themetallicityis the proportion of elements other than hydrogen or helium, as compared to the Sun. The initial mass is the mass of the star prior to the supernova event, given in multiples of the Sun's mass, although the mass at the time of the supernova may be much lower.[109]
Type IIn supernovae are not listed in the table. They can be produced by various types of core collapse in different progenitor stars, possibly even by Type Ia white dwarf ignitions, although it seems that most will be from iron core collapse in luminoussupergiantsorhypergiants(including LBVs). The narrow spectral lines for which they are named occur because the supernova is expanding into a small dense cloud of circumstellar material.[112]It appears that a significant proportion of supposed Type IIn supernovae are supernova impostors, massive eruptions of LBV-like stars similar to the Great Eruption ofEta Carinae. In these events, material previously ejected from the star creates the narrow absorption lines and causes a shock wave through interaction with the newly ejected material.[113]

## Detailed process
When a stellar core is no longer supported against gravity, it collapses in on itself with velocities reaching 70,000 km/s (0.23c),[115]resulting in a rapid increase in temperature and density. What follows depends on the mass and structure of the collapsing core, with low-mass degenerate cores forming neutron stars, higher-mass degenerate cores mostly collapsing completely to black holes, and non-degenerate cores undergoing runaway fusion.[114][116]
The initial collapse of degenerate cores is accelerated bybeta decay, photodisintegration and electron capture, which causes a burst ofelectron neutrinos. As the density increases,neutrino emissionis cut off as they become trapped in the core. The inner core eventually reaches typically 30kmin diameter[117]with a density comparable to that of anatomic nucleus, and neutrondegeneracy pressuretries to halt the collapse. If the core mass is more than about 15 solar masses then neutron degeneracy is insufficient to stop the collapse and a black hole forms directly with no supernova.[110]
In lower mass cores the collapse is stopped and the newly formed neutron core has an initial temperature of about 100 billionkelvins, 6,000 times the temperature of theSun's core.[114]At this temperature, neutrino-antineutrino pairs of allflavoursare efficiently formed bythermal emission. These thermal neutrinos are several times more abundant than the electron-capture neutrinos.[118]About1046joules, approximately 10% of the star's rest mass, is converted into a ten-second burst of neutrinos, which is the main output of the event.[117][119]The suddenly halted core collapse rebounds and produces a shock wave that stalls in the outer core within milliseconds[120]as energy is lost through the dissociation of heavy elements. A process that is not clearly understood[update]is necessary to allow the outer layers of the core to reabsorb around1044joules[119](1foe) from theneutrino pulse, producing the visible brightness, although there are other theories that could power the explosion.[117]
Some material from the outer envelope falls back onto the neutron star, and, for cores beyond about 8M☉, there is sufficient fallback to form a black hole. This fallback will reduce the kinetic energy created and the mass of expelled radioactive material, but in some situations, it may also generaterelativistic jetsthat result in agamma-ray burstor an exceptionally luminous supernova.[121]
The collapse of a massive non-degenerate core will ignite further fusion.[116]When the core collapse is initiated bypair instability(photonsturning intoelectron-positronpairs, thereby reducing the radiation pressure) oxygen fusion begins and the collapse may be halted. For core masses of 40–60M☉, the collapse halts and the star remains intact, but collapse will occur again when a larger core has formed. For cores of around 60–130M☉, the fusion of oxygen and heavier elements is so energetic that the entire star is disrupted, causing a supernova. At the upper end of the mass range, the supernova is unusually luminous and extremely long-lived due to many solar masses of ejected56Ni. For even larger core masses, the core temperature becomes high enough to allow photodisintegration and the core collapses completely into a black hole.[122][110]

## Type II
Stars with initial masses less than about 8M☉never develop a core large enough to collapse and they eventually lose their atmospheres to become white dwarfs. Stars with at least 9M☉(possibly as much as 12M☉[123]) evolve in a complex fashion, progressively burning heavier elements at hotter temperatures in their cores.[117][124]The star becomes layered like an onion, with the burning of more easily fused elements occurring in larger shells.[109][125]Although popularly described as an onion with an iron core, the least massive supernova progenitors only have oxygen-neon(-magnesium) cores. Thesesuper-AGB starsmay form the majority of core collapse supernovae, although less luminous and so less commonly observed than those from more massive progenitors.[123]
If core collapse occurs during a supergiant phase when the star still has a hydrogen envelope, the result is a Type II supernova.[126]The rate of mass loss for luminous stars depends on the metallicity andluminosity. Extremely luminous stars at near solar metallicity will lose all their hydrogen before they reach core collapse and so will not form a supernova of Type II.[126]At low metallicity, all stars will reach core collapse with a hydrogen envelope but sufficiently massive stars collapse directly to a black hole without producing a visible supernova.[109]
Stars with an initial mass up to about 90 times the Sun, or a little less at high metallicity, result in a Type II-P supernova, which is the most commonly observed type. At moderate to high metallicity, stars near the upper end of that mass range will have lost most of their hydrogen when core collapse occurs and the result will be a Type II-L supernova.[127]At very low metallicity, stars of around 140–250M☉will reach core collapse by pair instability while they still have a hydrogen atmosphere and an oxygen core and the result will be a supernova with Type II characteristics but a very large mass of ejected56Niand high luminosity.[109][128]

## Type Ib and Ic
These supernovae, like those of Type II, are massive stars that undergo core collapse. Unlike the progenitors of Type II supernovae, the stars which become Type Ib and Type Ic supernovae have lost most of their outer (hydrogen) envelopes due to strongstellar windsor else from interaction with a companion.[131]These stars are known asWolf–Rayet stars, and they occur at moderate to high metallicity where continuum driven winds cause sufficiently high mass-loss rates. Observations of Type Ib/c supernova do not match the observed or expected occurrence of Wolf–Rayet stars. Alternate explanations for this type of core collapse supernova involve stars stripped of their hydrogen by binary interactions. Binary models provide a better match for the observed supernovae, with the proviso that no suitable binary helium stars have ever been observed.[132]
Type Ib supernovae are more common than Type Ic and they result from Wolf–Rayet stars oftype WCwhich still have helium in their atmospheres. For a narrow range of masses, stars evolve further before reaching core collapse to becomeWO starswith very little helium remaining, and these are the progenitors of Type Ic supernovae.[133]
A few percent of the Type Ic supernovae are associated withgamma-ray bursts(GRB), though it is also believed that any hydrogen-stripped Type Ib or Ic supernova could produce a GRB, depending on the circumstances of the geometry.[134]The mechanism for producing this type of GRB is the jets produced by the magnetic field of the rapidly spinningmagnetarformed at the collapsing core of the star. The jets would also transfer energy into the expanding outer shell, producing asuper-luminous supernova.[121][135][136]
Ultra-stripped supernovae occur when the exploding star has been stripped (almost) all the way to the metal core, via mass transfer in a close binary.[137][138]As a result, very little material is ejected from the exploding star (c. 0.1M☉). In the most extreme cases, ultra-stripped supernovae can occur in naked metal cores, barely above the Chandrasekhar mass limit. SN 2005ek[139]might be the first observational example of an ultra-stripped supernova, giving rise to a relatively dim and fast decaying light curve. The nature of ultra-stripped supernovae can be both iron core-collapse and electron capture supernovae, depending on the mass of the collapsing core. Ultra-stripped supernovae are believed to be associated with the second supernova explosion in a binary system, producing for example a tight double neutron star system.[140][141]
In 2022 a team of astronomers led by researchers from theWeizmann Institute of Sciencereported the first supernova explosion showing direct evidence for a Wolf-Rayet progenitor star.SN 2019hgpwas a Type Icn supernova and is also the first in which the element neon has been detected.[142][143]

## Electron-capture supernovae
In 1980, a "third type" of supernova was predicted byKen'ichi Nomotoof theUniversity of Tokyo, called an electron-capture supernova. It would arise when a star "in the transitional range (~8 to 10 solar masses) between white dwarf formation and iron core-collapse supernovae", and with adegenerateO+Ne+Mg core,[144]imploded after its core ran out of nuclear fuel, causing gravity to compress the electrons in the star's core into their atomic nuclei,[145][146]leading to a supernova explosion and leaving behind a neutron star.[109]In June 2021, a paper in the journalNature Astronomyreported that the 2018 supernovaSN 2018zd(in the galaxyNGC 2146, about 31 million light-years fromEarth) appeared to be the first observation of an electron-capture supernova.[144][145][146]The 1054 supernova explosion that created the Crab Nebula in our galaxy had been thought to be the best candidate for an electron-capture supernova, and the 2021 paper makes it more likely that this was correct.[145][146]

## Failed supernovae
The core collapse of some massive stars may not result in a visible supernova. This happens if the initial core collapse cannot be reversed by the mechanism that produces an explosion, usually because the core is too massive. These events are difficult to detect, but large surveys have detected possible candidates.[147][148]The red supergiantN6946-BH1inNGC 6946underwent a modest outburst in March 2009, before fading from view. Only a faintinfraredsource remains at the star's location.[149]

## Light curves
The gases ejected by a supernova would dim quickly without some energy input to keep them hot. The source of this energy—which can maintain the optical supernova glow for months—was, at first, a puzzle. Some considered rotational energy from the central pulsar as a source.[153]Although the energy that initially powers each type of supernovae is delivered promptly, the light curves are dominated by subsequent radioactive heating of the rapidly expanding ejecta. The intensely radioactive nature of the ejecta gases was first calculated on sound nucleosynthesis grounds in the late 1960s, and this has since been demonstrated as correct for most supernovae.[154]It was not untilSN 1987Athat direct observation of gamma-ray lines unambiguously identified the major radioactive nuclei.[155]
It is now known by direct observation that much of the light curve (the graph of luminosity as a function of time) after the occurrence of aType II Supernova, such as SN 1987A, is explained by those predicted radioactive decays.[15]Although the luminous emission consists of optical photons, it is the radioactive power absorbed by the ejected gases that keeps the remnant hot enough to radiate light. The radioactive decay of56Nithrough its daughters56Coto56Feproduces gamma-rayphotons, primarily with energies of847keVand1,238 keV, that are absorbed and dominate the heating and thus the luminosity of the ejecta at intermediate times (several weeks) to late times (several months).[156]Energy for the peak of the light curve of SN1987A was provided by the decay of56Nito56Co(half-life 6 days) while energy for the later light curve in particular fit very closely with the 77.3-day half-life of56Codecaying to56Fe. Later measurements by space gamma-ray telescopes of the small fraction of the56Coand57Cogamma rays that escaped the SN 1987A remnant without absorption confirmed earlier predictions that those two radioactive nuclei were the power sources.[155]
The late-time decay phase of visual light curves for different supernova types all depend on radioactive heating, but they vary in shape and amplitude because of the underlying mechanisms, the way that visible radiation is produced, the epoch of its observation, and the transparency of the ejected material.[157]The light curves can be significantly different at other wavelengths. For example, at ultraviolet wavelengths there is an early extremely luminous peak lasting only a few hours corresponding to the breakout of the shock launched by the initial event, but that breakout is hardly detectable optically.[158][159]
The light curves for Type Ia are mostly very uniform, with a consistent maximum absolute magnitude and a relatively steep decline in luminosity. Their optical energy output is driven by radioactive decay of ejected56Ni(half-life 6 days), which then decays to radioactive56Co(half-life 77 days). These radioisotopes excite the surrounding material to incandescence.[92]Modern studies of cosmology rely on56Niradioactivity providing the energy for the optical brightness of supernovae of Type Ia, which are the "standard candles" of cosmology but whose diagnostic847 keVand1,238 keVgamma rays were first detected only in 2014.[160]The initial phases of the light curve decline steeply as the effective size of thephotospheredecreases and trapped electromagnetic radiation is depleted. The light curve continues to decline in theB bandwhile it may show a small shoulder in the visual at about 40 days, but this is only a hint of a secondary maximum that occurs in the infra-red as certain ionised heavy elements recombine to produce infra-red radiation and the ejecta become transparent to it. The visual light curve continues to decline at a rate slightly greater than the decay rate of the radioactive cobalt (which has the longer half-life and controls the later curve), because the ejected material becomes more diffuse and less able to convert the high energy radiation into visual radiation. After several months, the light curve changes its decline rate again aspositron emissionfrom the remaining56Cobecomes dominant, although this portion of the light curve has been little-studied.[161]
Type Ib and Ic light curves are similar to Type Ia although with a lower average peak luminosity. The visual light output is again due to radioactive decay being converted into visual radiation, but there is a much lower mass of the created56Ni. The peak luminosity varies considerably and there are even occasional Type Ib/c supernovae orders of magnitude more and less luminous than the norm. The most luminous Type Ic supernovae are referred to ashypernovaeand tend to have broadened light curves in addition to the increased peak luminosity. The source of the extra energy is thought to be relativistic jets driven by the formation of a rotating black hole, which also produce gamma-ray bursts.[162][163]
The light curves for Type II supernovae are characterised by a much slower decline than Type I, on the order of 0.05 magnitudes per day,[77]excluding the plateau phase. The visual light output is dominated by kinetic energy rather than radioactive decay for several months, due primarily to the existence of hydrogen in the ejecta from the atmosphere of the supergiant progenitor star. In the initial destruction this hydrogen becomes heated and ionised. The majority of Type II supernovae show a prolonged plateau in their light curves as this hydrogen recombines, emitting visible light and becoming more transparent. This is then followed by a declining light curve driven by radioactive decay although slower than in Type I supernovae, due to the efficiency of conversion into light by all the hydrogen.[69]
In Type II-L the plateau is absent because the progenitor had relatively little hydrogen left in its atmosphere, sufficient to appear in the spectrum but insufficient to produce a noticeable plateau in the light output. In Type IIb supernovae the hydrogen atmosphere of the progenitor is so depleted (thought to be due to tidal stripping by a companion star) that the light curve is closer to a Type I supernova and the hydrogen even disappears from the spectrum after several weeks.[69]
Type IIn supernovae are characterised by additional narrow spectral lines produced in a dense shell of circumstellar material. Their light curves are generally very broad and extended, occasionally also extremely luminous and referred to as a superluminous supernova. These light curves are produced by the highly efficient conversion of kinetic energy of the ejecta into electromagnetic radiation by interaction with the dense shell of material. This only occurs when the material is sufficiently dense and compact, indicating that it has been produced by the progenitor star itself only shortly before the supernova occurs.[164][165]
Large numbers of supernovae have been catalogued and classified to providedistance candlesand test models.[166][167]Average characteristics vary somewhat with distance and type of host galaxy, but can broadly be specified for each supernova type.
Notes:

## Asymmetry
A long-standing puzzle surrounding Type II supernovae is why the remaining compact object receives a large velocity away from the epicentre;[171]pulsars, and thus neutron stars, are observed to have highpeculiar velocities, and black holes presumably do as well, although they are far harder to observe in isolation. The initial impetus can be substantial, propelling an object of more than a solar mass at a velocity of 500 km/s or greater. This indicates an expansion asymmetry, but the mechanism by which momentum is transferred to the compact object remains[update]a puzzle. Proposed explanations for this kick include convection in the collapsing star, asymmetric ejection of matter duringneutron star formation, and asymmetricalneutrinoemissions.[171][172]
One possible explanation for this asymmetry is large-scaleconvectionabove the core. The convection can create radial variations in density giving rise to variations in the amount of energy absorbed from neutrino outflow.[114]However analysis of this mechanism predicts only modest momentum transfer.[173]Another possible explanation is that accretion of gas onto the central neutron star can create adiskthat drives highly directional jets, propelling matter at a high velocity out of the star, and driving transverse shocks that completely disrupt the star. These jets might play a crucial role in the resulting supernova.[174][175](A similar model is used for explaining long gamma-ray bursts.) The dominant mechanism may depend upon the mass of the progenitor star.[172]
Initial asymmetries have also been confirmed in Type Ia supernovae through observation. This result may mean that the initial luminosity of this type of supernova depends on the viewing angle. However, the expansion becomes more symmetrical with the passage of time. Early asymmetries are detectable by measuring the polarisation of the emitted light.[176]

## Energy output
Although supernovae are primarily known as luminous events, theelectromagnetic radiationthey release is almost a minor side-effect. Particularly in the case of core collapse supernovae, the emitted electromagnetic radiation is a tiny fraction of the total energy released during the event.[178]
There is a fundamental difference between the balance of energy production in the different types of supernova. In Type Ia white dwarf detonations, most of the energy is directed intoheavy element synthesisand thekinetic energyof the ejecta.[179]In core collapse supernovae, the vast majority of the energy is directed intoneutrinoemission, and while some of this apparently powers the observed destruction, 99%+ of the neutrinos escape the star in the first few minutes following the start of the collapse.[51]
Standard Type Ia supernovae derive their energy from a runaway nuclear fusion of a carbon-oxygen white dwarf. The details of the energetics are still not fully understood, but the result is the ejection of the entire mass of the original star at high kinetic energy. Around half a solar mass of that mass is56Nigenerated fromsilicon burning.56Niisradioactiveand decays into56Cobybeta plus decay(with ahalf lifeof six days) and gamma rays.56Coitself decays by the beta plus (positron) path with a half-life of 77 days into stable56Fe. These two processes are responsible for the electromagnetic radiation from Type Ia supernovae. In combination with the changing transparency of the ejected material, they produce the rapidly declining light curve.[177]
Core collapse supernovae are on average visually fainter than Type Ia supernovae,[150][151][152]but the total energy released is far higher, as outlined in the following table.
In some core collapse supernovae, fallback onto a black hole drivesrelativistic jetswhich may produce a brief energetic and directional burst of gamma rays and also transfers substantial further energy into the ejected material. This is one scenario for producing high-luminosity supernovae and is thought to be the cause of Type Ic hypernovae and long-duration gamma-ray bursts.[184]If the relativistic jets are too brief and fail to penetrate the stellar envelope then a low-luminosity gamma-ray burst may be produced and the supernova may be sub-luminous.[185]
When a supernova occurs inside a small dense cloud of circumstellar material, it will produce a shock wave that can efficiently convert a high fraction of the kinetic energy into electromagnetic radiation. Even though the initial energy was entirely normal the resulting supernova will have high luminosity and extended duration since it does not rely on exponential radioactive decay. This type of event may cause Type IIn hypernovae.[186][187]
Although pair-instability supernovae are core collapse supernovae with spectra and light curves similar to Type II-P, the nature after core collapse is more like that of a giant Type Ia with runaway fusion of carbon, oxygen and silicon. The total energy released by the highest-mass events is comparable to other core collapse supernovae but neutrino production is thought to be very low, hence the kinetic and electromagnetic energy released is very high. The cores of these stars are much larger than any white dwarf and the amount of radioactive nickel and other heavy elements ejected from their cores can be orders of magnitude higher, with consequently high visual luminosity.[188]

## Progenitor
The supernova classification type is closely tied to the type of progenitor star at the time of the collapse. The occurrence of each type of supernova depends on the star's metallicity, since this affects the strength of the stellar wind and thereby the rate at which the star loses mass.[189]
Type Ia supernovae are produced from white dwarf stars in binary star systems and occur in allgalaxy types.[190]Core collapse supernovae are only found in galaxies undergoing current or very recent star formation, since they result from short-lived massive stars. They are most commonly found in type Sc spirals, but also in the arms of other spiral galaxies and inirregular galaxies, especiallystarburst galaxies.[191][192][193]
Type Ib and Ic supernovae are hypothesised to have been produced by core collapse of massive stars that have lost their outer layer of hydrogen and helium, either via strong stellar winds or mass transfer to a companion.[163]They normally occur in regions of new star formation, and are extremely rare inelliptical galaxies.[74]The progenitors of Type IIn supernovae also have high rates of mass loss in the period just prior to their explosions.[194]Type Ic supernovae have been observed to occur in regions that are more metal-rich and have higher star-formation rates than average for their host galaxies.[195]The table shows the progenitor for the main types of core collapse supernova, and the approximate proportions that have been observed in the local neighbourhood.
There are a number of difficulties reconciling modelled and observed stellar evolution leading up to core collapse supernovae. Red supergiants are the progenitors for the vast majority of core collapse supernovae, and these have been observed but only at relatively low masses and luminosities, below about 18M☉and 100,000L☉, respectively. Most progenitors of Type II supernovae are not detected and must be considerably fainter, and presumably less massive. This discrepancy has been referred to as thered supergiant problem.[196]It was first described in 2009 by Stephen Smartt, who also coined the term. After performing a volume-limited search for supernovae, Smartt et al. found the lower and upper mass limits for Type II-P supernovae to form to be8.5+1−1.5M☉and16.5±1.5M☉, respectively. The former is consistent with the expected upper mass limits for white dwarf progenitors to form, but the latter is not consistent with massive star populations in the Local Group.[197]The upper limit for red supergiants that produce a visible supernova explosion has been calculated at19+4−2M☉.[196]
It is thought that higher mass red supergiants do not explode as supernovae, but instead evolve back towards hotter temperatures. Several progenitors of Type IIb supernovae have been confirmed, and these were K and G supergiants, plus one A supergiant.[198]Yellow hypergiants or LBVs are proposed progenitors for Type IIb supernovae, and almost all Type IIb supernovae near enough to observe have shown such progenitors.[199][200]
Blue supergiants form an unexpectedly high proportion of confirmed supernova progenitors, partly due to their high luminosity and easy detection, while not a single Wolf–Rayet progenitor has yet been clearly identified.[198][201]Models have had difficulty showing how blue supergiants lose enough mass to reach supernova without progressing to a different evolutionary stage. One study has shown a possible route for low-luminosity post-red supergiant luminous blue variables to collapse, most likely as a Type IIn supernova.[202]Several examples of hot luminous progenitors of Type IIn supernovae have been detected:SN 2005gyandSN 2010jlwere both apparently massive luminous stars, but are very distant; andSN 2009iphad a highly luminous progenitor likely to have been an LBV, but is a peculiar supernova whose exact nature is disputed.[198]
The progenitors of Type Ib/c supernovae are not observed at all, and constraints on their possible luminosity are often lower than those of knownWC stars.[198]WO starsare extremely rare and visually relatively faint, so it is difficult to say whether such progenitors are missing or just yet to be observed. Very luminous progenitors have not been securely identified, despite numerous supernovae being observed near enough that such progenitors would have been clearly imaged.[201]Population modelling shows that the observed Type Ib/c supernovae could be reproduced by a mixture of single massive stars and stripped-envelope stars from interacting binary systems.[132]The continued lack of unambiguous detection of progenitors for normal Type Ib and Ic supernovae may be due to most massive stars collapsing directly to a black holewithout a supernova outburst. Most of these supernovae are then produced from lower-mass low-luminosity helium stars in binary systems. A small number would be from rapidly rotating massive stars, likely corresponding to the highly energetic Type Ic-BL events that are associated with long-duration gamma-ray bursts.[198]

## External impact
Supernovae events generate heavier elements that are scattered throughout the surrounding interstellar medium. The expanding shock wave from a supernova can trigger star formation. Galactic cosmic rays are generated by supernova explosions.

## Source of heavy elements
Supernovae are a major source of elements in the interstellar medium from oxygen through to rubidium,[203][204][205]though the theoretical abundances of the elements produced or seen in the spectra varies significantly depending on the various supernova types.[205]Type Ia supernovae produce mainly silicon and iron-peak elements, metals such as nickel and iron.[206][207]Core collapse supernovae eject much smaller quantities of the iron-peak elements than Type Ia supernovae, but larger masses of lightalpha elementssuch as oxygen and neon, and elements heavier than zinc. The latter is especially true with electron capture supernovae.[208]The bulk of the material ejected by Type II supernovae is hydrogen and helium.[209]The heavy elements are produced by: nuclear fusion for nuclei up to34S; silicon photodisintegration rearrangement and quasiequilibrium during silicon burning for nuclei between36Arand56Ni; and rapid capture of neutrons (r-process) during the supernova's collapse for elements heavier than iron.  The r-process produces highly unstable nuclei that are rich inneutronsand that rapidly beta decay into more stable forms. In supernovae, r-process reactions are responsible for about half of all the isotopes of elements beyond iron,[210]althoughneutron star mergersmay be the main astrophysical source for many of these elements.[203][211]
In the modern universe, oldasymptotic giant branch(AGB) stars are the dominant source of dust from oxides, carbon ands-processelements.[203][212]However, in the early universe, before AGB stars formed, supernovae may have been the main source of dust.[213]

## Role in stellar evolution
Remnants of many supernovae consist of a compact object and a rapidly expanding shock wave of material. This cloud of material sweeps up surroundinginterstellar mediumduring a free expansion phase, which can last for up to two centuries. The wave then gradually undergoes a period ofadiabatic expansion, and will slowly cool and mix with the surrounding interstellar medium over a period of about 10,000 years.[214]
TheBig Bangproduced hydrogen,heliumand traces oflithium, while all heavier elements are synthesised in stars, supernovae, and collisions between neutron stars (thus being indirectly due to supernovae). Supernovae tend to enrich the surrounding interstellar medium with elements other than hydrogen and helium, which usually astronomers refer to as "metals".[215]These ejected elements ultimately enrich themolecular cloudsthat are the sites of star formation.[216]Thus, each stellar generation has a slightly different composition, going from an almost pure mixture of hydrogen and helium to a more metal-rich composition. Supernovae are the dominant mechanism for distributing these heavier elements, which are formed in a star during its period of nuclear fusion. The different abundances of elements in the material that forms a star have important influences on the star's life,[215][217]and may influence the possibility of havingplanetsorbiting it: moregiant planetsform around stars of higher metallicity.[218][219]
The kinetic energy of an expanding supernova remnant can trigger star formation by compressing nearby, dense molecular clouds in space.[220]The increase in turbulent pressure can also prevent star formation if the cloud is unable to lose the excess energy.[221]
Evidence from daughter products of short-livedradioactive isotopesshows that a nearby supernova helped determine the composition of theSolar System4.5 billion years ago, and may even have triggered the formation of this system.[222]
Fast radio bursts(FRBs) are intense, transient pulses of radio waves that typically last no more than milliseconds. Many explanations for these events have been proposed;magnetarsproduced by core-collapse supernovae are leading candidates.[223][224][225][226]

## Cosmic rays
Supernova remnants are thought to accelerate a large fraction of galactic primarycosmic rays, but direct evidence for cosmic ray production has only been found in a small number of remnants. Gamma rays frompion-decay have been detected from the supernova remnantsIC 443and W44. These are produced when acceleratedprotonsfrom the remnant impact on interstellar material.[227]

## Gravitational waves
Supernovae are potentially strong galactic sources ofgravitational waves,[228]but none have so far been detected. The only gravitational wave events so far detected are from mergers of black holes and neutron stars, probable remnants of supernovae.[229]Like the neutrino emissions, the gravitational waves produced by a core-collapse supernova are expected to arrive before the light generated by the subsequent explosion. Consequently, they may provide information about the core-collapse process that is unavailable by other means. Most gravitational-wave signals predicted by supernova models are short in duration, lasting less than a second, and thus difficult to detect. Using the arrival of a neutrino signal may provide a trigger that can identify the time window in which to seek the gravitational wave, helping to distinguish the latter from background noise.[230]

## Effect on Earth
A near-Earth supernova is a supernova close enough to the Earth to have noticeable effects on itsbiosphere. Depending upon the type and energy of the supernova, it could be as far as 3,000 light-years away.
In 1996 it was theorised that traces of past supernovae might be detectable on Earth in the form of metal isotope signatures inrock strata.Iron-60enrichment was later reported in deep-sea rock of thePacific Ocean.[231][232][233]In 2009, elevated levels of nitrate ions were found in Antarctic ice, which coincided with the 1006 and 1054 supernovae. Gamma rays from these supernovae could have boosted atmospheric levels of nitrogen oxides, which became trapped in the ice.[234]
Historically, nearby supernovae may have influenced thebiodiversityof life on the planet. Geological records suggest that nearby supernova events have led to an increase in cosmic rays, which in turn produced a cooler climate. A greater temperature difference between the poles and the equator created stronger winds, increased ocean mixing, and resulted in the transport ofnutrientsto shallow waters along thecontinental shelves. This led to greater biodiversity.[235][236]
Type Ia supernovae are thought to be potentially the most dangerous if they occur close enough to the Earth. Because these supernovae arise from dim, common white dwarf stars in binary systems, it is likely that a supernova that can affect the Earth will occur unpredictably and in a star system that is not well studied. The closest-known candidate isIK Pegasi(HR 8210), about 150 light-years away,[237][238]but observations suggest that it could be as long as 1.9 billion years before the white dwarf can accrete the critical mass required to become a Type Ia supernova.[239]
According to a 2003 estimate, a Type II supernova would have to be closer than 8parsecs(26 light-years) to destroy half of the Earth's ozone layer, and there are no such candidates closer than about 500 light-years.[240]

## Milky Way candidates
The next supernova in the Milky Way will likely be detectable even if it occurs on the far side of the galaxy. It is likely to be produced by the collapse of an unremarkable red supergiant, and it is very probable that it will already have been catalogued in infrared surveys such as2MASS. There is a smaller chance that the next core collapse supernova will be produced by a different type of massive star such as a yellow hypergiant, luminous blue variable, or Wolf–Rayet. The chances of the next supernova being a Type Ia produced by a white dwarf are calculated to be about a third of those for a core collapse supernova. Again it should be observable wherever it occurs, but it is less likely that the progenitor will ever have been observed. It is not even known exactly what a Type Ia progenitor system looks like, and it is difficult to detect them beyond a few parsecs. The total supernova rate in the Milky Way is estimated to be between 2 and 12 per century, although one has not actually been observed for several centuries.[149]
Statistically, the most common variety of core-collapse supernova is Type II-P, and the progenitors of this type are red supergiants.[242]It is difficult to identify which of those supergiants are in the final stages of heavy element fusion in their cores and which have millions of years left. The most-massive red supergiants shed their atmospheres and evolve to Wolf–Rayet stars before their cores collapse. All Wolf–Rayet stars end their lives from the Wolf–Rayet phase within a million years or so, but again it is difficult to identify those that are closest to core collapse. One class that is expected to have no more than a few thousand years before exploding are the WO Wolf–Rayet stars, which are known to have exhausted their core helium.[243]Only eight of them are known, and only four of those are in the Milky Way.[244]
A number of close or well-known stars have been identified as possible core collapse supernova candidates: the high-mass blue starsSpica,RigelandDeneb,[245]the red supergiantsBetelgeuse,Antares, andVV Cephei A;[246][247][248]the yellow hypergiantRho Cassiopeiae;[249]the luminous blue variable Eta Carinae that has already produced a supernova impostor;[250]and both components, a blue supergiant and a Wolf–Rayet star, of the Regor orGamma Velorumsystem.[251][252]Mimosa,Acruxand Hadar orBeta Centauri, three bright star systems in the southern constellation ofCruxandCentaurusrespectively, each contain blue stars with sufficient masses to explode as supernovae.[253][254][255]Others have gained notoriety as possible, although not very likely, progenitors for a gamma-ray burst; for exampleWR 104.[256]
Identification of candidates for a Type Ia supernova is much more speculative. Any binary with an accreting white dwarf might produce a supernova, although the exact mechanism and timescale is still debated. These systems are faint and difficult to identify, but the novae andrecurrent novaeare such systems that conveniently advertise themselves. One example isU Scorpii.[257]