## Surrealism
Surrealismis anartandcultural movementthat developed in Europe in theaftermath of World War Iin which artists aimed to allow theunconscious mindto express itself, often resulting in the depiction ofillogicalordreamlikescenes and ideas.[1]Its intention was, according to leaderAndré Breton, to "resolve the previously contradictory conditions of dream and reality into an absolute reality, a super-reality", orsurreality.[2][3][4]It produced works of painting, writing, photography,theatre,filmmaking,music,comedyand other media as well.
Works of Surrealism feature theelement of surprise, unexpectedjuxtapositionsandnon sequitur. However, many Surrealist artists and writers regard their work as an expression of the philosophical movement first and foremost (for instance, of the "pure psychicautomatism" Breton speaks of in the firstSurrealist Manifesto), with the works themselves being secondary, i.e., artifacts of surrealist experimentation.[5]Leader Breton was explicit in his assertion that Surrealism was, above all, a revolutionary movement. At the time, the movement was associated with political causes such ascommunismandanarchism. It was influenced by theDadamovement of the 1910s.[6]
The term "Surrealism" originated withGuillaume Apollinairein 1917.[7][8]However, the Surrealist movement was not officially established until after October 1924, when the Surrealist Manifesto published by Breton succeeded in claiming the term for his group over a rival faction led byYvan Goll, who had published his own surrealist manifesto two weeks prior.[9]The most important center of the movement wasParis, France. From the 1920s onward, the movement spread around the globe, impacting the visual arts, literature, theatre, film, and music of many countries and languages, as well as political thought and practice, philosophy, and social and cultural theories.

## Founding of the movement
The wordsurrealismwas first coined in March 1917 byGuillaume Apollinaire.[10]He wrote in a letter toPaul Dermée: "All things considered, I think in fact it is better to adopt surrealism than supernaturalism, which I first used" [Tout bien examiné, je crois en effet qu'il vaut mieux adopter surréalisme que surnaturalisme que j'avais d'abord employé].[11]
Apollinaire used the term in his program notes forSergei Diaghilev'sBallets Russes,Parade, which premiered 18 May 1917.Paradehad a one-act scenario byJean Cocteauand was performed with music byErik Satie. Cocteau described the ballet as "realistic". Apollinaire went further, describingParadeas "surrealistic":[12]
This new alliance—I say new, because until now scenery and costumes were linked only by factitious bonds—has given rise, inParade, to a kind of surrealism, which I consider to be the point of departure for a whole series of manifestations of the New Spirit that is making itself felt today and that will certainly appeal to our best minds. We may expect it to bring about profound changes in our arts and manners through universal joyfulness, for it is only natural, after all, that they keep pace with scientific and industrial progress. (Apollinaire, 1917)[13]
The term was taken up again by Apollinaire, both as subtitle and in the preface to his playLes Mamelles de Tirésias: Drame surréaliste,[14]which was written in 1903 and first performed in 1917.[15]
World War Iscattered the writers and artists who had been based in Paris, and in the interim, many became involved with Dada, believing that excessive rational thought andbourgeoisvalues had brought the conflict of the war upon the world. The Dadaists protested withanti-artgatherings, performances, writings and art works. After the war, when they returned to Paris, the Dada activities continued.
During the war,André Breton, who had trained in medicine and psychiatry, served in aneurologicalhospital where he usedSigmund Freud's psychoanalytic methods with soldiers suffering fromshell-shock. Meeting the young writerJacques Vaché, Breton felt that Vaché was the spiritual son of writer andpataphysicsfounderAlfred Jarry.  He admired the young writer's anti-social attitude and disdain for established artistic tradition. Later Breton wrote, "In literature, I was successively taken withRimbaud, with Jarry, with Apollinaire, withNouveau, withLautréamont, but it is Jacques Vaché to whom I owe the most."[16]
Back in Paris, Breton joined in Dada activities and started the literary journalLittératurealong withLouis AragonandPhilippe Soupault. They began experimenting withautomatic writing—spontaneously writing without censoring their thoughts—and published the writings, as well as accounts of dreams, in the magazine. Breton and Soupault continued writing evolving their techniques of automatism and publishedThe Magnetic Fields(1920).
By October 1924, two rival Surrealist groups had formed to publish aSurrealist Manifesto. Each claimed to be successors of a revolution launched by Appolinaire. One group, led byYvan Gollconsisted ofPierre Albert-Birot,Paul Dermée,Céline Arnauld,Francis Picabia,Tristan Tzara,Giuseppe Ungaretti,Pierre Reverdy,Marcel Arland,Joseph Delteil,Jean PainlevéandRobert Delaunay, among others.[17]The group led by André Breton claimed thatautomatismwas a better tactic for societal change than those of Dada, as led by Tzara, who was now among their rivals. Breton's group grew to include writers and artists from variousmediasuch asPaul Éluard,Benjamin Péret,René Crevel,Robert Desnos,Jacques Baron,Max Morise,[18]Pierre Naville,Roger Vitrac,Gala Éluard,Max Ernst,Salvador Dalí,Luis Buñuel,Man Ray,Hans Arp,Georges Malkine,Michel Leiris,Georges Limbour,Antonin Artaud,Raymond Queneau,André Masson,Joan Miró,Marcel Duchamp,Jacques Prévert, andYves Tanguy,Dora Maar[19][20][21]
As they developed their philosophy, they believed that Surrealism would advocate the idea that ordinary and depictive expressions are vital and important, but that the sense of their arrangement must be open to the full range of imagination according to theHegelian Dialectic. They also looked to theMarxist dialecticand the work of such theorists asWalter BenjaminandHerbert Marcuse.[22]
Freud's concepts of free association, dream analysis and accessing the unconscious were of crucial importance to the Surrealists in advancing their project to liberate the imagination. They embracedidiosyncrasy, while rejecting the idea of an underlying madness. As Dalí later proclaimed, "There is only one difference between a madman and me. I am not mad."[18]
Beside the use of dream analysis, they emphasized that "one could combine inside the same frame, elements not normally found together to produce illogical and startling effects."[23]Breton included the idea of the startling juxtapositions in his 1924 manifesto, taking it in turn from a 1918 essay by poetPierre Reverdy, which said: "a juxtaposition of two more or less distant realities. The more the relationship between the two juxtaposed realities is distant and true, the stronger the image will be−the greater its emotional power and poetic reality."[24]
The group aimed to revolutionize human experience, in its personal, cultural, social, and political aspects.  They wanted to free people from false rationality, and restrictive customs and structures. Breton proclaimed that the true aim of Surrealism was "long live the social revolution, and it alone!" To this goal, at various times Surrealists aligned withcommunismandanarchism.
In 1924, two Surrealist factions declared their philosophy in two separate Surrealist Manifestos. That same year theBureau of Surrealist Researchwas established and began publishing the journalLa Révolution surréaliste.

## Surrealist Manifestos
Leading up to 1924, two rival surrealist groups had formed. Each group claimed to be successors of a revolution launched by Apollinaire. One group, led byYvan Goll, consisted ofPierre Albert-Birot,Paul Dermée,Céline Arnauld,Francis Picabia,Tristan Tzara,Giuseppe Ungaretti,Pierre Reverdy,Marcel Arland,Joseph Delteil,Jean PainlevéandRobert Delaunay, among others.[26]
The other group, led by Breton, included Aragon, Desnos, Éluard, Baron, Crevel, Malkine,Jacques-André Boiffardand Jean Carrive, among others.[27]
Yvan Goll published theManifeste du surréalisme, 1 October 1924, in his first and only issue ofSurréalisme[25]two weeks prior to the release of Breton'sManifeste du surréalisme, published by Éditions du Sagittaire, 15 October 1924.
Goll and Breton clashed openly, at one point literally fighting, at the Comédie des Champs-Élysées,[26]over the rights to the term Surrealism. In the end, Breton won the battle through tactical and numerical superiority.[28][29]Though the quarrel over the anteriority of Surrealism concluded with the victory of Breton, the history of surrealism from that moment would remain marked by fractures, resignations, and resounding excommunications, with each surrealist having their own view of the issue and goals, and accepting more or less the definitions laid out by André Breton.[30][31]
Breton's 1924Surrealist Manifestodefines the purposes of Surrealism. He included citations of the influences on Surrealism, examples of Surrealist works, and discussion of Surrealist automatism. He provided the following definitions:
Dictionary:Surrealism, n. Pure psychic automatism, by which one proposes to express, either verbally, in writing, or by any other manner, the real functioning of thought. Dictation of thought in the absence of all control exercised by reason, outside of all aesthetic and moral preoccupation.Encyclopedia:Surrealism. Philosophy. Surrealism is based on the belief in the superior reality of certain forms of previously neglected associations, in the omnipotence of dream, in the disinterested play of thought. It tends to ruin once and for all other psychic mechanisms and to substitute itself for them in solving all the principal problems of life.[4]

## Expansion
The movement in the mid-1920s was characterized by meetings in cafes where the Surrealists played collaborative drawing games, discussed the theories of Surrealism, and developed a variety oftechniquessuch asautomatic drawing. Breton initially doubted that visual arts could even be useful in the Surrealist movement since they appeared to be less malleable and open to chance and automatism. This caution was overcome by the discovery of such techniques asfrottage,grattage[32]anddecalcomania.
Soon more visual artists became involved, includingGiorgio de Chirico,Max Ernst,Joan Miró,Francis Picabia,Yves Tanguy,Salvador Dalí,Luis Buñuel,Alberto Giacometti,Valentine Hugo,Méret Oppenheim,Toyen, andKansuke Yamamoto. Later, after thesecond World War,Enrico Donati, Vinicius Pradella and Denis Fabbri became involved as well. Though Breton admiredPablo PicassoandMarcel Duchampand courted them to join the movement, they remained peripheral.[33]More writers also joined, including former DadaistTristan Tzara,René Char, andGeorges Sadoul.
In 1925 an autonomous Surrealist group formed in Brussels. The group included the musician, poet, and artistE. L. T. Mesens, painter and writerRené Magritte,Paul Nougé,Marcel Lecomte, andAndré Souris. In 1927 they were joined by the writerLouis Scutenaire. They corresponded regularly with the Paris group, and in 1927 both Goemans and Magritte moved to Paris and frequented Breton's circle.[19]The artists, with their roots inDadaandCubism, the abstraction ofWassily Kandinsky,Expressionism, andPost-Impressionism, also reached to older "bloodlines" orproto-surrealistssuch asHieronymus Bosch, and the so-called primitive and naive arts.
André Masson'sautomatic drawingsof 1923 are often used as the point of the acceptance of visual arts and the break from Dada, since they reflect the influence of the idea of theunconscious mind. Another example is Giacometti's 1925Torso, which marked his movement to simplified forms and inspiration from preclassical sculpture.
However, a striking example of the line used to divide Dada and Surrealism among art experts is the pairing of 1925'sLittle Machine Constructed by Minimax Dadamax in Person (Von minimax dadamax selbst konstruiertes maschinchen)[34]withThe Kiss (Le Baiser)[35]from 1927 by Max Ernst.[clarification needed]The first is generally held to have a distance, and erotic subtext, whereas the second presents an erotic act openly and directly.[improper synthesis?]In the second the influence ofMiróand the drawing style ofPicassois visible with the use of fluid curving and intersecting lines and colour, whereas the first takes a directness that would later be influential in movements such asPop art.
Giorgio de Chirico, and his previous development ofmetaphysical art, was one of the important joining figures between the philosophical and visual aspects of Surrealism. Between 1911 and 1917, he adopted an unornamented depictional style whose surface would be adopted by others later.The Red Tower (La tour rouge)from 1913 shows the stark colour contrasts and illustrative style later adopted by Surrealist painters. His 1914The Nostalgia of the Poet (La Nostalgie du poète)[36]has the figure turned away from the viewer, and the juxtaposition of a bust with glasses and a fish as a relief defies conventional explanation. He was also a writer whose novelHebdomerospresents a series of dreamscapes with an unusual use of punctuation, syntax, and grammar designed to create an atmosphere and frame its images. His images, including set designs for theBallets Russes, would create a decorative form of Surrealism, and he would be an influence on the two artists who would be even more closely associated with Surrealism in the public mind: Dalí and Magritte. He would, however, leave the Surrealist group in 1928.
In 1924, Miró and Masson applied Surrealism to painting. The first Surrealist exhibition,La Peinture Surrealiste, was held at Galerie Pierre in Paris in 1925. It displayed works by Masson,Man Ray,Paul Klee, Miró, and others. The show confirmed that Surrealism had a component in the visual arts (though it had been initially debated whether this was possible), and techniques from Dada, such asphotomontage, were used. The following year, on March 26, 1926, Galerie Surréaliste opened with an exhibition by Man Ray. Breton publishedSurrealism and Paintingin 1928 which summarized the movement to that point, though he continued to update the work until the 1960s.

## Surrealist literature
The first Surrealist work, according to leader Breton, wasLes Chants de Maldoror,[37]and the first work written and published by his group ofSurréalisteswasLes Champs Magnétiques(May–June 1919).[38]Littératurecontained automatist works and accounts of dreams. The magazine and the portfolio both showed their disdain for literal meanings given to objects and focused rather on the undertones; the poetic undercurrents present. Not only did they give emphasis to the poetic undercurrents, but also to the connotations and the overtones which "exist in ambiguous relationships to the visual images."[39]
Because Surrealist writers seldom, if ever, appear to organize their thoughts and the images they present, some people find much of their work difficult to parse. This notion however is a superficial comprehension, prompted no doubt by Breton's initial emphasis on automatic writing as the main route toward a higher reality. But—as in Breton's case—much of what is presented as purely automatic is actually edited and very "thought out". Breton himself later admitted that automatic writing's centrality had been overstated, and other elements were introduced, especially as the growing involvement of visual artists in the movement forced the issue, since automatic painting required a rather more strenuous set of approaches. Thus, such elements as collage were introduced, arising partly from an ideal of startling juxtapositions as revealed inPierre Reverdy's poetry. And—as in Magritte's case (where there is no obvious recourse to either automatic techniques or collage)—the very notion of convulsive joining became a tool for revelation in and of itself. Surrealism was meant to be always in flux—to be more modern than modern—and so it was natural there should be a rapid shuffling of the philosophy as new challenges arose. Artists such as Max Ernst and his surrealist collages demonstrate this shift to a more modern art form that also comments on society.[40]
Surrealists revived interest in Isidore Ducasse, known by his pseudonymComte de Lautréamont, and for the line "beautiful as the chance meeting on a dissecting table of a sewing machine and an umbrella", andArthur Rimbaud, two late 19th-century writers believed to be the precursors of Surrealism.
Examples of Surrealist literature are Artaud'sLe Pèse-Nerfs(1926), Aragon'sIrene's Cunt(1927), Péret'sDeath to the Pigs(1929), Crevel'sMr. Knife Miss Fork(1931),Sadegh Hedayat'sThe Blind Owl(1937), and Breton'sSur la route de San Romano(1948).
La Révolution surréalistecontinued publication into 1929 with most pages densely packed with columns of text, but which also included reproductions of art, among them works by de Chirico, Ernst, Masson, and Man Ray. Other works included books, poems, pamphlets, automatic texts and theoretical tracts.

## Surrealist films
Early films by Surrealists include:

## Surrealist photography
Famous Surrealist photographers are the FrenchDora Maar, the AmericanMan Ray, the French/HungarianBrassaï, FrenchClaude Cahunand the DutchEmiel van Moerkerken.[41][42][43]In Japan (seeSurrealism in Japan), the 1937 exhibitionKaigai Chōgenjitsushugi Sakuhin Ten(Exhibition of Overseas Surrealist Works)—described as Japan’s first Surrealism “international” exhibition—consisted largely of photographs, many of them reproductions of Surrealist paintings and objects.[44]Surrealist photography also influenced avant-garde circles there; for example, the Japanese poet and photographerKansuke Yamamotoparticipated in theNagoya Photo Avant-Garde.[45][46]

## Surrealist theatre
The wordsurrealistwas first used by Apollinaire to describe his 1917 playLes Mamelles de Tirésias("The Breasts of Tiresias"), which was lateradapted into an operabyFrancis Poulenc.[47]
Roger Vitrac'sThe Mysteries of Love(1927) andVictor, or The Children Take Over(1928) are often considered the best examples of Surrealist theatre, despite his expulsion from the movement in 1926.[48][49][50]The plays were staged at theTheatre Alfred Jarry, the theatre Vitrac co-founded withAntonin Artaud, another early Surrealist who was expelled from the movement.[51]
Following his collaboration with Vitrac, Artaud would extend Surrealist thought through his theory of theTheatre of Cruelty. Artaud rejected the majority of Western theatre as a perversion of its original intent, which he felt should be a mystical, metaphysical experience.[52]Instead, he envisioned a theatre that would be immediate and direct, linking the unconscious minds of performers and spectators in a sort of ritual event, Artaud created  in which emotions, feelings, and the metaphysical were expressed not through language but physically, creating a mythological, archetypal, allegorical vision, closely related to the world of dreams.[53][54]
The Spanish playwright and directorFederico García Lorca, also experimented with surrealism, particularly in his playsThe Public(1930),When Five Years Pass(1931), andPlay Without a Title(1935). Other surrealist plays include Aragon'sBacks to the Wall(1925).[55]Gertrude Stein's operaDoctor Faustus Lights the Lights(1938) has also been described as "American Surrealism", though it is also related to a theatrical form ofcubism.[56]

## Surrealist music
In the 1920s several composers were influenced by Surrealism, or by individuals in the Surrealist movement. Among them wereBohuslav Martinů,André Souris,Erik Satie,[57]Francis Poulenc,[58][59]andEdgard Varèse, who stated that his workArcanawas drawn from a dream sequence.[60]Souris in particular was associated with the movement: he had a long relationship with Magritte, and worked onPaul Nougé's publicationAdieu Marie. Music by composers from across the twentieth century have been associated with surrealist principles, includingPierre Boulez,[61]György Ligeti,[62]Mauricio Kagel,Olivier Messiaen,[63]andThomas Adès.[64][65]
Germaine Tailleferreof the French groupLes Sixwrote several works which could be considered to be inspired by Surrealism,[66]including the 1948 balletParis-Magie(scenario byLise Deharme), the operasLa Petite Sirène(book by Philippe Soupault) andLe Maître(book by Eugène Ionesco).[67]Tailleferre also wrote popular songs to texts by Claude Marci, the wife of Henri Jeanson, whose portrait had been painted by Magritte in the 1930s.
Even though Breton by 1946 responded rather negatively to the subject of music with his essaySilence is Golden, later Surrealists, such asPaul Garon, have been interested in—and found parallels to—Surrealism in the improvisation ofjazzand theblues. Jazz and blues musicians have occasionally reciprocated this interest. For example, the1976 World Surrealist Exhibitionincluded performances byDavid "Honeyboy" Edwards.

## Surrealism and international politics
Surrealism as a political force developed unevenly around the world: in some places more emphasis was on artistic practices, in other places on political practices, and in other places still, Surrealist praxis looked to supersede both the arts and politics. During the 1930s, the Surrealist idea spread from Europe to North America, South America (founding of theMandrágoragroup in Chile in 1938),Central America,the Caribbean, and throughout Asia, as both an artistic idea and as an ideology of political change.[68][69]
Politically, Surrealism wasTrotskyist,communist, oranarchist.[68]The split from Dada has been characterised as a split between anarchists and communists, with the Surrealists as communist. Breton and his comrades supportedLeon Trotskyand hisInternational Left Oppositionfor a while, though there was an openness to anarchism that manifested more fully after World War II. Some Surrealists, such asBenjamin Péret, Mary Low, and Juan Breá, aligned with forms ofleft communism. When the Dutch surrealist photographerEmiel van Moerkerkencame to Breton, he did not want to sign the manifesto because he was not a Trotskyist. For Breton being a communist was not enough. Breton denied Van Moerkerken's pictures for a publication afterwards.[41]This caused a split in surrealism. Others fought for complete liberty from political ideologies, likeWolfgang Paalen, who, after Trotsky's assassination in Mexico, prepared a schism between art and politics through his counter-surrealist art-magazineDYNand so prepared the ground for the abstract expressionists. Dalí supported capitalism and the fascist dictatorship ofFrancisco Francobut cannot be said to represent a trend in Surrealism in this respect; in fact, he was considered, by Breton and his associates, to have betrayed and left Surrealism. Benjamin Péret, Mary Low, Juan Breá, and Spanish-nativeEugenio Fernández Granelljoined thePOUMduring theSpanish Civil War.[68][69]
Breton's followers, along with theCommunist Party, were working for the "liberation of man". However, Breton's group refused to prioritize theproletarianstruggle over radical creation such that their struggles with the Party made the late 1920s a turbulent time for both. Many individuals closely associated with Breton, notably Aragon, left his group to work more closely with the Communists.[68][69]
Surrealists have often sought to link their efforts with political ideals and activities. In theDeclaration of January 27, 1925,[70]for example, members of the Paris-basedBureau of Surrealist Research(including Breton, Aragon and Artaud, as well as some two dozen others) declared their affinity for revolutionary politics. While this was initially a somewhat vague formulation, by the 1930s many Surrealists had strongly identified themselves with communism. The foremost document of this tendency within Surrealism is theManifesto for a Free Revolutionary Art,[71]published under the names of Breton andDiego Rivera, but actually co-authored by Breton andLeon Trotsky.[72]
However, in 1933 the Surrealists' assertion that a "proletarian literature" within a capitalist society was impossible led to their break with the Association des Ecrivains et Artistes Révolutionnaires, and the expulsion of Breton, Éluard and Crevel from the Communist Party.[19]
In 1925, the Paris Surrealist group and the extreme left of theFrench Communist Partycame together to supportAbd-el-Krim, leader of theRifuprising against French colonialism inMorocco. In an open letter to writer and French ambassador to Japan,Paul Claudel, the Paris group announced:
We Surrealists pronounced ourselves in favour of changing the imperialist war, in its chronic and colonial form, into a civil war. Thus we placed our energies at the disposal of the revolution, of the proletariat and its struggles, and defined our attitude towards the colonial problem, and hence towards the colour question.
The anticolonial revolutionary and proletarian politics of "Murderous Humanitarianism" (1932) which was drafted mainly by Crevel, signed by Breton, Éluard, Péret, Tanguy, and the Martiniquan SurrealistsPierre YoyotteandJ.M. Monnerotperhaps makes it the original document of what is later called "black Surrealism",[73]although it is the contact betweenAimé Césaireand Breton in the 1940s inMartiniquethat really lead to the communication of what is known as "black Surrealism".
Anticolonial revolutionary writers in theNégritudemovement ofMartinique, a French colony at the time, took up Surrealism as a revolutionary method – a critique of European culture and a radical subjective. This linked with other Surrealists and was very important for the subsequent development of Surrealism as a revolutionary praxis. The journalTropiques, featuring the work of Césaire along withSuzanne Césaire,René Ménil,Lucie Thésée,Aristide Maugéeand others, was first published in 1941.[74]
In 1938 André Breton traveled with his wife, the painterJacqueline Lamba, toMexicoto meet Trotsky (staying as the guest of Diego Rivera's former wife Guadalupe Marin), and there he metFrida Kahloand saw her paintings for the first time. Breton declared Kahlo to be an "innate" Surrealist painter.[75]

## Internal politics
In 1929 the satellite group associated with the journalLe Grand Jeu, includingRoger Gilbert-Lecomte,Maurice Henryand the Czech painterJosef Sima, was ostracized. Also in February, Breton asked Surrealists to assess their "degree of moral competence", and theoretical refinements included in the secondmanifeste du surréalismeexcluded anyone reluctant to commit to collective action, a list which included Leiris, Limbour, Morise, Baron, Queneau, Prévert, Desnos, Masson and Boiffard. Excluded members launched a counterattack, sharply criticizing Breton in the pamphletUn Cadavre, which featured a picture of Breton wearing acrown of thorns. The pamphlet drew upon an earlier act of subversion by likening Breton toAnatole France, whose unquestioned value Breton had challenged in 1924.
The disunion of 1929–30 and the effects ofUn Cadavrehad very little negative impact upon Surrealism as Breton saw it, since core figures such as Aragon, Crevel, Dalí and Buñuel remained true to the idea of group action, at least for the time being. The success (or the controversy) of Dalí and Buñuel's filmL'Age d'Orin December 1930 had a regenerative effect, drawing a number of new recruits, and encouraging countless new artistic works the following year and throughout the 1930s.
Disgruntled surrealists moved to the periodicalDocuments, edited byGeorges Bataille, whose anti-idealist materialism formed a hybrid Surrealism intending to expose the base instincts of humans.[19][76]To the dismay of many,Documentsfizzled out in 1931, just as Surrealism seemed to be gathering more steam.
There were a number of reconciliations after this period of disunion, such as between Breton and Bataille, while Aragon left the group after committing himself to theFrench Communist Partyin 1932. More members were ousted over the years for a variety of infractions, both political and personal, while others left in pursuit of their own style.
By the end of World War II, the surrealist group led by André Breton decided to explicitly embrace anarchism. In 1952 Breton wrote "It was in the black mirror of anarchism that surrealism first recognised itself."[77]Breton was consistent in his support for thefrancophone Anarchist Federationand he continued to offer his solidarity after thePlatformistssupporting Fontenis transformed the FA into the Fédération Communiste Libertaire. He was one of the few intellectuals who continued to offer his support to the FCL during the Algerian war when the FCL suffered severe repression and was forced underground. He sheltered Fontenis whilst he was in hiding. He refused to take sides on the splits in the French anarchist movement and both he and Peret expressed solidarity as well with the newFédération anarchisteset up by the synthesist anarchists and worked in the Antifascist Committees of the 60s alongside the FA.[77]

## Golden age
Throughout the 1930s, Surrealism continued to become more visible to the public at large. ASurrealist group developed in Londonand, according to Breton, their 1936London International Surrealist Exhibitionwas a high-water mark of the period and became the model for international exhibitions. Another English Surrealist group developedin Birmingham, meanwhile, and was distinguished by its opposition to the London surrealists and preferences for surrealism's French heartland. The two groups would reconcile later in the decade.
Dalí and Magritte created the most widely recognized images of the movement. Dalí joined the group in 1929 and participated in the rapid establishment of the visual style between 1930 and 1935.
Surrealism as a visual movement had found a method: to expose psychological truth; stripping ordinary objects of their normal significance, to create a compelling image that was beyond ordinary formal organization, in order to evoke empathy from the viewer.
1931 was a year when several Surrealist painters produced works which marked turning points in their stylistic evolution: Magritte'sVoice of Space (La Voix des airs)[78]is an example of this process, where three large spheres representing bells hang above a landscape. Another Surrealist landscape from this same year is Yves Tanguy'sPromontory Palace (Palais promontoire), with its molten forms and liquid shapes. Liquid shapes became the trademark of Dalí, particularly in hisThe Persistence of Memory, which features the image of watches that sag as if they were melting.
The characteristics of this style—a combination of the depictive, the abstract, and the psychological—came to stand for the alienation which many people felt in themodernperiod, combined with the sense of reaching more deeply into the psyche, to be "made whole with one's individuality".
Between 1930 and 1933, the Surrealist Group in Paris issued the periodicalLe Surréalisme au service de la révolutionas the successor ofLa Révolution surréaliste.
From 1936 through 1938Wolfgang Paalen,Gordon Onslow Ford, andRoberto Mattajoined the group. Paalen contributedFumageand Onslow FordCoulageas new pictorial automatic techniques.
Long after personal, political and professional tensions fragmented the Surrealist group, Magritte and Dalí continued to define a visual program in the arts. This program reached beyond painting, to encompass photography as well, as can be seen from a Man Ray self-portrait, whose use of assemblage influencedRobert Rauschenberg's collage boxes.
During the 1930sPeggy Guggenheim, an important American art collector, married Max Ernst and began promoting work by other Surrealists such as Yves Tanguy and the British artistJohn Tunnard.
Major exhibitions in the 1930s

## World War II and the Post War period
World War II created havoc not only for the general population of Europe but especially for the European artists and writers that opposed Fascism and Nazism. Many important artists fled to North America and relative safety in the United States. The art community inNew York Cityin particular was already grappling with Surrealist ideas and several artists likeArshile Gorky,Jackson Pollock, andRobert Motherwellconverged closely with the surrealist artists themselves, albeit with some suspicion and reservations. Ideas concerning the unconscious and dream imagery were quickly embraced. By the Second World War, the taste of the Americanavant-gardein New York swung decisively towardsAbstract Expressionismwith the support of key taste makers, includingPeggy Guggenheim,Leo SteinbergandClement Greenberg. However, it should not be easily forgotten that Abstract Expressionism itself grew directly out of the meeting of American (particularly New York) artists with European Surrealists self-exiled during World War II. In particular, Gorky and Paalen influenced the development of this American art form, which, as Surrealism did, celebrated the instantaneous human act as the well-spring of creativity. The early work of many Abstract Expressionists reveals a tight bond between the more superficial aspects of both movements, and the emergence (at a later date) of aspects ofDadaistichumor in such artists asRauschenbergsheds an even starker light upon the connection. Up until the emergence ofPop Art, Surrealism can be seen to have been the single most important influence on the sudden growth in American arts, and even in Pop, some of the humor manifested in Surrealism can be found, often turned to a cultural criticism.
The Second World War overshadowed, for a time, almost all intellectual and artistic production. In 1939 Wolfgang Paalen was the first to leave Paris for the New World as exile. After a long trip through the forests of British Columbia, he settled in Mexico and founded his influential art-magazineDyn. In 1940 Yves Tanguy married American Surrealist painterKay Sage. In 1941, Breton went to the United States, where he co-founded the short-lived magazineVVVwith Max Ernst, Marcel Duchamp, and the American artistDavid Hare. However, it was the American poet,Charles Henri Ford, and his magazineViewwhich offered Breton a channel for promoting Surrealism in the United States. TheViewspecial issue on Duchamp was crucial for the public understanding of Surrealism in America. It stressed his connections to Surrealist methods, offered interpretations of his work by Breton, as well as Breton's view that Duchamp represented the bridge between early modern movements, such asFuturismandCubism, to Surrealism. Wolfgang Paalen left the group in 1942 due to political/philosophical differences with Breton.
Though the war proved disruptive for Surrealism, the works continued. Many Surrealist artists continued to explore their vocabularies, including Magritte. Many members of the Surrealist movement continued to correspond and meet. While Dalí may have been excommunicated by Breton, he neither abandoned his themes from the 1930s, including references to the "persistence of time" in a later painting, nor did he become a depictive pompier. His classic period did not represent so sharp a break with the past as some descriptions of his work might portray, and some, such asAndré Thirion, argued that there were works of his after this period that continued to have some relevance for the movement. When the war reached Ireland with theBelfast Blitzin May 1941,Colin Middleton, who had experimented with surrealist themes in the 1930s, responded with a series of dark works reflecting the shocked state of the people of the city. These were exhibited at theBelfast Municipal Gallery and Museumafter its restoration in 1943, following near destruction in the blitz.[80]
During the 1940s Surrealism's influence was also felt in England, America and the Netherlands where Gertrude Pape and her husband Theo van Baaren helped to popularize it in their publication The Clean Handkerchief.[81]Mark Rothkotook an interest inbiomorphicfigures, and in EnglandHenry Moore,Lucian Freud,Francis BaconandPaul Nashused or experimented with Surrealist techniques. However,Conroy Maddox, one of the first British Surrealists whose work in this genre dated from 1935, remained within the movement, and organized an exhibition of current Surrealist work in 1978 in response to an earlier show which infuriated him because it did not properly represent Surrealism. Maddox's exhibition, titledSurrealism Unlimited, was held in Paris and attracted international attention. He held his last one-man show in 2002, and died three years later.  Magritte's work became more realistic in its depiction of actual objects, while maintaining the element of juxtaposition, such as in 1951'sPersonal Values (Les Valeurs Personnelles)[82]and 1954'sEmpire of Light  (L’Empire des lumières).[83]Magritte continued to produce works which have entered artistic vocabulary, such asCastle in the Pyrenees (Le Château des Pyrénées),[84]which refers back toVoixfrom 1931, in its suspension over a landscape.
Other figures from the Surrealist movement were expelled. Several of these artists, likeRoberto Matta(by his own description) "remained close to Surrealism".[33]Frida Kahlo should be mentioned. She had a New York solo exhibition in 1938 with 25 paintings, encouraged by Breton himself.
InSouth America, the ChileanSurrealistgroupLa Mandrágorawas founded in 1938 byBraulio Arenas,Teófilo Cid, andEnrique Gómez Correa. The group published an eponymous review and was instrumental in introducing Surrealist thought to theSouthern Cone, often supported by the poetVicente Huidobro.[85]Along with Matta, the Mandragora would be a significant literary influence onRoberto Bolaño.
After the crushing of theHungarian Revolution of 1956,Endre Rozsdareturned to Paris to continue creating his own word that had been transcended the surrealism. The preface to his first exhibition in the Furstenberg Gallery (1957) was written by Breton yet.[86]
Many new artists explicitly took up the Surrealist banner.Dorothea TanningandLouise Bourgeoiscontinued to work, for example, with Tanning'sRainy Day Canapefrom 1970. Duchamp continued to produce sculpture in secret, including his installation depicting a woman realistically, viewed through a peephole:Étant donnés.
Breton continued to write and espouse the importance of liberating the human mind, as with the publicationThe Tower of Lightin 1952. Breton's return to France after the War, began a new phase of Surrealist activity in Paris, and his critiques of rationalism and dualism found a new audience. Breton insisted that Surrealism was an ongoing revolt against the reduction of humanity to market relationships, religious gestures and misery and to espouse the importance of liberating the human mind.
Major exhibitions of the 1940s, '50s and '60s

## Post-Breton Surrealism
TheAfro-Surrealismis an art and literary movement primarily in theAfrican diaspora, inspired byNégritudeandpostcolonial literatureand partially coinciding with them.[89]
In the 1960s, the artists and writers associated with theSituationist Internationalwere closely associated with Surrealism. WhileGuy Debordwas critical of and distanced himself from Surrealism, others, such asAsger Jorn, were explicitly using Surrealist techniques and methods.The events of May 1968in France included a number of Surrealist ideas, and among the slogans the students spray-painted on the walls of the Sorbonne were familiar Surrealist ones.Joan Mirówould commemorate this in a painting titledMay 1968.There were also groups who associated with both currents and were more attached to Surrealism, such as theRevolutionary Surrealist Group.
During the 1980s, behind theIron Curtain, Surrealism again entered into politics with an underground artistic opposition movement known as theOrange Alternative. The Orange Alternative was created in 1981 byWaldemar Fydrych(alias 'Major'), a graduate of history and art history at the University ofWrocław. They used Surrealist symbolism and terminology in their large-scale happenings organized in the major Polish cities during theJaruzelskiregime and painted Surrealist graffiti on spots covering up anti-regime slogans. Major himself was the author of a "Manifesto of Socialist Surrealism". In this manifesto, he stated that the socialist (communist) system had become so Surrealistic that it could be seen as an expression of art itself.
Surrealistic art also remains popular with museum patrons. TheGuggenheim Museumin New York City held an exhibit,Two Private Eyes, in 1999, and in 2001Tate Modernheld an exhibition of Surrealist art that attracted over 170,000 visitors. In 2002 theMetin New York City held a show,Desire Unbound, and theCentre Georges Pompidouin Paris a show calledLa Révolution surréaliste. In 2021–2022, The Metropolitan Museum of Art and Tate Modern co-organized the international survey exhibitionSurrealism Beyond Borders, bringing together examples produced across 45 or more countries over almost eight decades to reassess Surrealism’s transnational networks beyond a primarily Western European orientation.[90]
Surrealist groups and literary publications have continued to be active up to the present day, with groups such as theChicago Surrealist Group, the Leeds Surrealist Group, Peculiar Mormyrid, andThe Surrealist Group in Stockholm.Jan Švankmajerof the Czech-Slovak Surrealists continues to make films and experiment with objects.

## Impact and influences
While Surrealism is typically associated with the arts, it has impacted many other fields. In this sense, Surrealism does not specifically refer only to self-identified "Surrealists", or those sanctioned by Breton, rather, it refers to a range of creative acts of revolt and efforts to liberate imagination.[91]In addition to Surrealist theory being grounded in the ideas ofHegel,MarxandFreud, to its advocates its inherent dynamic isdialecticalthought.[92]Surrealist artists have also cited thealchemists,Dante,Hieronymus Bosch,[93][94]theMarquis de Sade,[93]Charles Fourier,Comte de LautréamontandArthur Rimbaudas influences.[95][96]

## May 68
Surrealists believe that non-Western cultures also provide a continued source of inspiration for Surrealist activity because some may induce a better balance between instrumental reason and imagination in flight than Western culture.[97][98]Surrealism has had an identifiable impact on radical and revolutionary politics, both directly — as in some Surrealists joining or allying themselves with radical political groups, movements and parties — and indirectly — through the way in which Surrealists emphasize the intimate link between freeing imagination and the mind, and liberation from repressive and archaic social structures. This was especially visible in theNew Leftof the 1960s and 1970s and theFrench revolt of May 1968, whose slogan "All power to the imagination" quoted byThe SituationistsandEnragés[99]from the originally Marxist "Rêvé-lutionary" theory and praxis of Breton's French Surrealist group.[100]

## Postmodernism and popular culture
Many significant literary movements in the later half of the 20th century were directly or indirectly influenced by Surrealism. This period is known as thePostmodernera; though there is no widely agreed upon central definition ofPostmodernism, many themes and techniques commonly identified as Postmodern are nearly identical to Surrealism.
First Papers of Surrealism presented the fathers of surrealism in an exhibition that represented the leading monumental step of the avant-gardes towards installation art.[101]Many writers from and associated with theBeat Generationwere influenced greatly by Surrealists.Philip Lamantia[102]andTed Joans[103]are often categorized as both Beat and Surrealist writers. Many other Beat writers show significant evidence of Surrealist influence. A few examples includeBob Kaufman,[104][105]Gregory Corso,[106]Allen Ginsberg,[107]andLawrence Ferlinghetti.[108]Artaud in particular was very influential to many of the Beats, but especially Ginsberg andCarl Solomon.[109]Ginsberg cites Artaud's "Van Gogh – The Man Suicided by Society" as a direct influence on "Howl",[110]along with Apollinaire's "Zone",[111]García Lorca's "Ode to Walt Whitman",[112]and Schwitters' "Priimiititiii".[113]The structure of Breton's "Free Union" had a significant influence on Ginsberg's "Kaddish".[114]In Paris, Ginsberg and Corso met their heroes Tristan Tzara, Marcel Duchamp, Man Ray, and Benjamin Péret, and to show their admiration Ginsberg kissed Duchamp's feet and Corso cut off Duchamp's tie.[115]
William S. Burroughs, a core member of the Beat Generation and a postmodern novelist, developed thecut-up techniquewith former surrealistBrion Gysin—in which chance is used to dictate the composition of a text from words cut out of other sources—referring to it as the "Surrealist Lark" and recognizing its debt to the techniques of Tristan Tzara.[116]
Postmodern novelistThomas Pynchon, who was also influenced by Beat fiction, experimented since the 1960s with the surrealist idea of startling juxtapositions; commenting on the "necessity of managing this procedure with some degree of care and skill", he added that "any old combination of details will not do. Spike Jones Jr., whose father's orchestral recordings had a deep and indelible effect on me as a child, said once in an interview, 'One of the things that people don't realize about Dad's kind of music is, when you replace a C-sharp with a gunshot, it has to be a C-sharp gunshot or it sounds awful.'"[23]
Many other postmodern fiction writers have been directly influenced by Surrealism.Paul Auster, for example, has translated Surrealist poetry and said the Surrealists were "a real discovery" for him.[117]Salman Rushdie, when called a Magical Realist, said he saw his work instead "allied to surrealism".[118][119]David Lynchregarded as a surrealist filmmaker being quoted, "David Lynch has once again risen to the spotlight as a champion of surrealism,"[120]in regard to his showTwin Peaks. For the work of other postmodernists, such asDonald Barthelme[121]andRobert Coover,[122]a broad comparison to Surrealism is common.
Magic realism, a popular technique among novelists of the latter half of the 20th century especially among Latin American writers, has some obvious similarities to Surrealism with its juxtaposition of the normal and the dream-like, as in the work ofGabriel García Márquez.[123]Carlos Fuenteswas inspired by the revolutionary voice in Surrealist poetry and points to inspiration Breton and Artaud found in Fuentes' homeland, Mexico.[124]Though Surrealism was a direct influence on Magic Realism in its early stages, many Magic Realist writers and critics, such as Amaryll Chanady[125]and S. P. Ganguly,[126]while acknowledging the similarities, cite the many differences obscured by the direct comparison of Magic Realism and Surrealism such as an interest in psychology and the artefacts of European culture they claim is not present in Magic Realism.  A prominent example of a Magic Realist writer who points to Surrealism as an early influence isAlejo Carpentierwho also later criticized Surrealism's delineation between real and unreal as not representing the true South American experience.[127][128]

## Surrealist groups
Surrealist individuals and groups have carried on with Surrealism after the death of André Breton in 1966. The original Paris Surrealist Group was disbanded by member Jean Schuster in 1969, but another Parisian surrealist group was later formed. The current Surrealist Group of Paris has recently published the first issue of their new journal,Alcheringa. The Group of Czech-Slovak Surrealists never disbanded, and continue to publish their journalAnalogon, which now spans almost 100 volumes.

## Surrealism and the theatre
Surrealist theatre and Artaud's "Theatre of Cruelty" were inspirational to many within the group of playwrights that the critic Martin Esslin called the "Theatre of the Absurd" (in his 1963 book of the same name). Though not an organized movement, Esslin grouped these playwrights together based on some similarities of theme and technique; Esslin argues that these similarities may be traced to an influence from the Surrealists.Eugène Ionescoin particular was fond of Surrealism, claiming at one point that Breton was one of the most important thinkers in history.[129][130]Samuel Beckettwas also fond of Surrealists, even translating much of the poetry into English.[131][132]Other notable playwrights whom Esslin groups under the term, for exampleArthur AdamovandFernando Arrabal, were at some point members of the Surrealist group.[133][134][135]
Alice Farley is an American-born artist who became active during the 1970s in San Francisco after training in dance at the California Institute of the Arts.[136]Farley uses vivid and elaborate costuming that she describes as "the vehicles of transformation capable of making a character's thoughts visible".[136]Often collaborating with musicians such asHenry Threadgill, Farley explores the role of improvisation in dance, bringing in an automatic aspect to the productions.[137]Farley has performed in a number of surrealist collaborations including theWorld Surrealist Exhibitionin Chicago in 1976.[136][138]

## Alleged precursors in older art
Various much older artists are sometimes claimed as precursors of Surrealism. Foremost among these areHieronymus Bosch[139]andGiuseppe Arcimboldo, whom Dalí called the "father of Surrealism."[140]Apart from their followers, other artists who may be mentioned in this context includeJoos de Momper, for someanthropomorphiclandscapes.  Many critics feel these works belong tofantastic artrather than having a significant connection with Surrealism.[141]