## Transistor
Atransistoris asemiconductor deviceused toamplifyorswitchelectrical signalsandpower. It is one of the basic building blocks of modernelectronics.[1]It is composed ofsemiconductor material, usually with at least threeterminalsfor connection to anelectronic circuit. Avoltageorcurrentapplied to one pair of the transistor's terminals controls the current through another pair of terminals. Because the controlled (output) power can be higher than the controlling (input) power, a transistor can amplify a signal. Some transistors are packaged individually, but many more in miniature form are found embedded inintegrated circuits. Because transistors are the key active components in practically all modernelectronics, many people consider them one of the 20th century's greatest inventions.[2]
PhysicistJulius Edgar Lilienfeldproposed the concept of afield-effect transistor(FET) in 1925,[3]but it was not possible to construct a working device at that time.[4]The first working device was apoint-contact transistorinvented in 1947 by physicistsJohn Bardeen,Walter Brattain, andWilliam ShockleyatBell Labswho shared the 1956Nobel Prize in Physicsfor their achievement.[5]The most widely used type of transistor, themetal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET), was invented at Bell Labs between 1955 and 1960.[6][7][8][9][10][11]Transistors revolutionized the field of electronics and paved the way for smaller and cheaperradios,calculators,computers, and other electronic devices.
Most transistors are made from very puresilicon, and some fromgermanium, but certain other semiconductor materials are sometimes used. A transistor may have only one kind ofcharge carrierin afield-effect transistor, or may have two kinds of charge carriers inbipolar junction transistordevices. Compared with thevacuum tube, transistors are generally smaller and require less power to operate. Certain vacuum tubes have advantages over transistors at very high operating frequencies or high operating voltages, such astraveling-wave tubesandgyrotrons. Many types of transistors are made to standardized specifications by multiple manufacturers.

## History
Thethermionictriode, avacuum tubeinvented in 1907, enabled amplifiedradiotechnology and long-distancetelephony. The triode, however, was a fragile device that consumed a substantial amount of power. In 1909,physicistWilliam Ecclesdiscovered thecrystal diode oscillator.[12]PhysicistJulius Edgar Lilienfeldfiled a patent for afield-effect transistor(FET) in Canada in 1925,[13]intended as asolid-statereplacement for the triode.[14][15]He filed identical patents in the United States in 1926[16]and 1928.[17][18]However, he did not publish any research articles about his devices nor did his patents cite any specific examples of a working prototype. Because the production of high-qualitysemiconductormaterials was still decades away, Lilienfeld's solid-state amplifier ideas would not have found practical use in the 1920s and 1930s, even if such a device had been built.[19]In 1934, inventorOskar Heilpatented a similar device in Europe.[20]

## Bipolar transistors
From November 17 to December 23, 1947,John BardeenandWalter BrattainatAT&T'sBell LabsinMurray Hill, New Jersey, performed experiments and observed that when two gold point contacts were applied to a crystal ofgermanium, a signal was produced with the output power greater than the input.[21]Solid State Physics Group leaderWilliam Shockleysaw the potential in this, and over the next few months worked to greatly expand the knowledge ofsemiconductors. The termtransistorwas coined byJohn R. Pierceas a contraction of the termtransresistance.[22][23][24]According toLillian Hoddesonand Vicki Daitch, Shockley proposed that Bell Labs' first patent for a transistor should be based on the field-effect and that he be named as the inventor. Having unearthed Lilienfeld's patents that went into obscurity years earlier, lawyers at Bell Labs advised against Shockley's proposal because the idea of a field-effect transistor that used an electric field as agridwas not new. Instead, what Bardeen, Brattain, and Shockley invented in 1947 was the firstpoint-contact transistor.[19]To acknowledge this accomplishment, Shockley, Bardeen and Brattain jointly received the 1956Nobel Prize in Physics"for their researches on semiconductors and their discovery of the transistor effect".[25][26]
Shockley's team initially attempted to build a field-effect transistor (FET) by trying to modulate the conductivity of a semiconductor, but was unsuccessful, mainly due to problems with thesurface states, thedangling bond, and thegermaniumandcoppercompound materials. Trying to understand the mysterious reasons behind this failure led them instead to invent the bipolarpoint-contactandjunction transistors.[27][28]
In 1948, the point-contact transistor was independently invented by physicistsHerbert MataréandHeinrich Welkerwhile working at theCompagnie des Freins et Signaux Westinghouse, aWestinghousesubsidiary in Paris. Mataré had previous experience in developingcrystal rectifiersfromsiliconand germanium in the Germanradareffort duringWorld War II. With this knowledge, he began researching the phenomenon ofinterferencein 1947. By June 1948, witnessing currents flowing through point-contacts, he produced consistent results using samples of germanium produced by Welker, similar to what Bardeen and Brattain had accomplished earlier in December 1947. Realizing that Bell Labs' scientists had already invented the transistor, the company rushed to get itstransistroninto production for amplified use in France's telephone network, filing his first transistor patent application on August 13, 1948.[29][30][31]
The firstbipolar junction transistorswere invented by Bell Labs' William Shockley, who applied for patent (2,569,347) on June 26, 1948. On April 12, 1950, Bell Labs chemistsGordon TealandMorgan Sparkssuccessfully produced a working bipolar NPN junction amplifying germanium transistor. Bell announced the discovery of this newsandwichtransistor in a press release on July 4, 1951.[32][33]
The first high-frequency transistor was thesurface-barrier germanium transistordeveloped byPhilcoin 1953, capable of operating at frequencies up to60 MHz.[34]They were made by etching depressions into an n-type germanium base from both sides with jets ofindium(III) sulfateuntil it was a few ten-thousandths of an inch thick.Indiumelectroplated into the depressions formed the collector and emitter.[35][36]
AT&T first used transistors in telecommunications equipment in the No. 4A Toll Crossbar Switching System in 1953, for selecting trunk circuits from routing information encoded on translator cards.[37]Its predecessor, the Western Electric No. 3Aphototransistor, read the mechanical encoding from punched metal cards.
The first prototype pockettransistor radiowas shown by INTERMETALL, a company founded byHerbert Mataréin 1952, at theInternationale Funkausstellung Düsseldorffrom August 29 to September 6, 1953.[38][39]The first production-model pocket transistor radio was theRegency TR-1, released in October 1954.[26]Produced as a joint venture between the Regency Division of Industrial Development Engineering Associates, I.D.E.A. andTexas Instrumentsof Dallas, Texas, the TR-1 was manufactured in Indianapolis, Indiana. It was a near pocket-sized radio with four transistors and one germanium diode. The industrial design was outsourced to the Chicago firm of Painter, Teague and Petertil. It was initially released in one of six colours: black, ivory, mandarin red, cloud grey, mahogany and olive green. Other colours shortly followed.[40][41][42]
The first production all-transistor car radio was developed by Chrysler andPhilcocorporations and was announced in the April 28, 1955, edition ofThe Wall Street Journal. Chrysler made the Mopar model 914HR available as an option starting in fall 1955 for its new line of 1956 Chrysler and Imperial cars, which reached dealership showrooms on October 21, 1955.[43][44]
TheSonyTR-63, released in 1957, was the first mass-produced transistor radio, leading to the widespread adoption of transistor radios.[45]Seven million TR-63s were sold worldwide by the mid-1960s.[46]Sony's success with transistor radios led to transistors replacing vacuum tubes as the dominantelectronic technologyin the late 1950s.[47]
The first working silicon transistor was developed at Bell Labs on January 26, 1954, byMorris Tanenbaum.  The first production commercial silicon transistor was announced byTexas Instrumentsin May 1954. This was the work ofGordon Teal, an expert in growing crystals of high purity, who had previously worked at Bell Labs.[48][49][50]

## Field-effect transistors
The basic principle of thefield-effect transistor(FET) was first proposed by physicistJulius Edgar Lilienfeldwhen he filed apatentfor a device similar toMESFETin 1926, and for an insulated-gate field-effect transistor in 1928.[15][51]The FET concept was later also theorized by engineerOskar Heilin the 1930s and byWilliam Shockleyin the 1940s.
In 1945,JFETwas patented byHeinrich Welker.[52]Following Shockley's theoretical treatment on JFET in 1952, a working practical JFET was made in 1953 byGeorge C. DaceyandIan M. Ross.[53]
In 1948, Bardeen and Brattain patented the progenitor of MOSFET at Bell Labs, an insulated-gate FET (IGFET) with an inversion layer. Bardeen's patent, and the concept of an inversion layer, forms the basis of CMOS and DRAM technology today.[54]
In the early years of thesemiconductor industry, companies focused on thejunction transistor, a relatively bulky device that was difficult tomass-produce, limiting it to several specialized applications.Field-effect transistors(FETs) were theorized as potential alternatives, but researchers could not get them to work properly, largely due to thesurface statebarrier that prevented the externalelectric fieldfrom penetrating the material.[55]

## MOSFET (MOS transistor)
In 1955,Carl Froschand Lincoln Derick accidentally grew a layer of silicon dioxide over the silicon wafer, for which they observed surface passivation effects.[6][56]By 1957 Frosch and Derick, using masking and predeposition, were able to manufacture silicon dioxide field-effect transistors; the first planar transistors, in which drain and source were adjacent at the same surface.[7]They showed that silicon dioxide insulated and protected silicon wafers and prevented dopants from diffusing into the wafer.[6][7]After this, J. R. Ligenza and W. G. Spitzer studied the mechanism of thermally grown oxides, fabricated a high-quality Si/SiO2stack and published their results in 1960.[57][58][59]
Following this research,Mohamed AtallaandDawon Kahngproposed a silicon MOS transistor in 1959[60]and successfully demonstrated a working MOS device with their Bell Labs team in 1960.[61][62]Their team included E. E. LaBate and E. I. Povilonis, who fabricated the device; M. O. Thurston, L. A. D'Asaro, and J. R. Ligenza, who developed the diffusion processes, and H. K. Gummel and R. Lindner, who characterized the device.[8][9]With itshigh scalability,[63]much lower power consumption, and higher density than bipolar junction transistors,[64]the MOSFET made it possible to buildhigh-density integrated circuits,[65]allowing the integration of more than 10,000 transistors in a single IC.[66]
Bardeen and Brattain's 1948 inversion-layer concept forms the basis of CMOS technology today.[67]TheCMOS(complementaryMOS) was invented byChih-Tang SahandFrank WanlassatFairchild Semiconductorin 1963.[68]The first report of afloating-gate MOSFETwas made by Dawon Kahng andSimon Szein 1967.[69]
In 1967, Bell Labs researchers Robert Kerwin,Donald Kleinand John Sarace developed theself-aligned gate(silicon-gate) MOS transistor, which Fairchild Semiconductor researchersFederico Fagginand Tom Klein used to develop the firstsilicon-gateMOSintegrated circuit.[70]
Adouble-gateMOSFET was first demonstrated in 1984 byElectrotechnical Laboratoryresearchers Toshihiro Sekigawa and Yutaka Hayashi.[71][72]TheFinFET(fin field-effect transistor), a type of 3D non-planarmulti-gateMOSFET, originated from the research of Digh Hisamoto and his team atHitachiCentral Research Laboratory in 1989.[73][74]

## Importance
Because transistors are the key active components in practically all modernelectronics, many people consider them one of the 20th century's greatest inventions.[2]
The 1947 invention of the first transistor at Bell Labs was named anIEEE Milestonein 2009.[75]Other Milestones include the inventions of thejunction transistorin 1948 and the MOSFET in 1959.[76]
The MOSFET is by far the most widely used transistor, in applications ranging fromcomputersandelectronics[77]tocommunications technologysuch assmartphones.[78]It has been considered the most important transistor,[79]possibly the most important invention in electronics,[80]and the device that enabled modern electronics.[81]It has been the basis of moderndigital electronicssince the late 20th century, paving the way for thedigital age.[82]TheUS Patent and Trademark Officecalls it a "groundbreaking invention that transformed life and culture around the world".[78]Its ability to bemass-producedby a highly automated process (semiconductor device fabrication), from relatively basic materials, allows astonishingly low per-transistor costs. MOSFETs are the most numerously produced artificial objects in history, with more than 13sextillionmanufactured by 2018.[83]
Although several companies each produce over a billion individually packaged (known asdiscrete) MOS transistors every year,[84]the vast majority are produced inintegrated circuits(also known asICs,microchips,or simplychips), along withdiodes,resistors,capacitorsand otherelectronic components, to produce complete electronic circuits. Alogic gateconsists of up to about 20 transistors, whereas an advancedmicroprocessor, As of 2023[update], may contain as many as92 billion transistor on a die, and double that 184 billion when dual die (and for exceptional chips, 2.6 trillion transistors, as of 2020).[85]Transistors are often organized into logic gates in microprocessors to perform computation.[86]
The transistor's low cost, flexibility and reliability have made it ubiquitous. Transistorizedmechatroniccircuits have replacedelectromechanical devicesin controlling appliances and machinery. It is often easier and cheaper to use a standardmicrocontrollerand write acomputer programto carry out a control function than to design an equivalent mechanical system.

## Simplified operation
A transistor can use a small signal applied between one pair of its terminals to control a much larger signal at another pair of terminals, a property calledgain. It can produce a stronger output signal, a voltage or current, proportional to a weaker input signal, acting as anamplifier. It can also be used as an electrically controlledswitch, where the amount of current is determined by other circuit elements.[87]
There are two types of transistors, with slight differences in how they are used:
The top image in this section represents a typical bipolar transistor in a circuit. A charge flows between emitter and collector terminals depending on the current in the base. Because the base and emitter connections behave like a semiconductor diode, a voltage drop develops between them. The amount of this drop, determined by the transistor's material, is referred to asVBE.[88](Base Emitter Voltage)

## Transistor as a switch
Transistors are commonly used indigital circuitsaselectronic switcheswhich can be either in anonoroffstate, both for high-power applications such asswitched-mode power suppliesand for low-power applications such aslogic gates. Important parameters for this application include the current switched, the voltage handled, and the switching speed, characterized by therise and fall times.[88]
In a switching circuit, the goal is to simulate, as near as possible, the ideal switch having the properties of an open circuit when off, the short circuit when on, and an instantaneous transition between the two states. Parameters are chosen such that theoffoutput is limited to leakage currents too small to affect connected circuitry, the resistance of the transistor in theonstate is too small to affect circuitry, and the transition between the two states is fast enough not to have a detrimental effect.[88]
In a grounded-emitter transistor circuit, such as the light-switch circuit shown, as the base voltage rises, the emitter and collector currents rise exponentially. The collector voltage drops because of reduced resistance from the collector to the emitter. If the voltage difference between the collector and emitter were zero (or near zero), the collector current would be limited only by the load resistance (light bulb) and the supply voltage. This is calledsaturationbecause the current is flowing from collector to emitter freely. When saturated, the switch is said to beon.[89]
The use of bipolar transistors for switching applications requires biasing the transistor so that it operates between its cut-off region in the off-state and the saturation region (on). This requires sufficient base drive current. As the transistor provides current gain, it facilitates the switching of a relatively large current in the collector by a much smaller current into the base terminal. The ratio of these currents varies depending on the type of transistor, and even for a particular type, varies depending on the collector current. In the example of a light-switch circuit, as shown, the resistor is chosen to provide enough base current to ensure the transistor is saturated.[88]The base resistor value is calculated from the supply voltage, transistor C-E junction voltage drop, collector current, and amplification factor beta.[90]

## Transistor as an amplifier
Thecommon-emitter amplifieris designed so that a small change in voltage (Vin) changes the small current through the base of the transistor whose current amplification combined with the properties of the circuit means that small swings inVinproduce large changes inVout.[88]
Various configurations of single transistor amplifiers are possible, with some providing current gain, some voltage gain, and some both.
Frommobile phonestotelevisions, vast numbers of products include amplifiers forsound reproduction,radio transmission, andsignal processing. The first discrete-transistor audio amplifiers barely supplied a few hundred milliwatts, but power and audio fidelity gradually increased as better transistors became available and amplifier architecture evolved.[88]
Modern transistor audio amplifiers of up to a few hundredwattsare common and relatively inexpensive.

## Comparison with vacuum tubes
Before transistors were developed,vacuum (electron) tubes(or in the UKthermionic valvesor justvalves) were the main active components in electronic equipment.

## Advantages
The key advantages that have allowed transistors to replace vacuum tubes in most applications are

## Limitations
Transistors may have the following limitations:

## Classification
Transistors are categorized by
Hence, a particular transistor may be described assilicon, surface-mount, BJT, NPN, low-power, high-frequency switch.

## Mnemonics
Convenientmnemonicto remember the type of transistor (represented by anelectrical symbol) involves the direction of the arrow. For theBJT, on ann–p–ntransistor symbol, the arrow will "NotPoint iN". On ap–n–ptransistor symbol, the arrow "Points iNProudly". However, this does not apply to MOSFET-based transistor symbols as the arrow is typically reversed (i.e. the arrow for the n–p–n points inside).

## Field-effect transistor (FET)
Thefield-effect transistor, sometimes called aunipolar transistor, uses either electrons (inn-channel FET) or holes (inp-channel FET) for conduction. The four terminals of the FET are namedsource,gate,drain, andbody(substrate). On most FETs, the body is connected to the source inside the package, and this will be assumed for the following description.
In a FET, the drain-to-source current flows via a conducting channel that connects thesourceregion to thedrainregion. The conductivity is varied by the electric field that is produced when a voltage is applied between the gate and source terminals, hence the current flowing between the drain and source is controlled by the voltage applied between the gate and source. As the gate–source voltage (VGS) is increased, the drain–source current (IDS) increases exponentially forVGSbelow threshold, and then at a roughly quadratic rate:  (IDS∝  (VGS−VT)2, whereVTis the threshold voltage at which drain current begins)[94]in thespace-charge-limitedregion above threshold. A quadratic behavior is not observed in modern devices, for example, at the65 nmtechnology node.[95]
For low noise at narrowbandwidth, the higher input resistance of the FET is advantageous.
FETs are divided into two families:junction FET(JFET) andinsulated gate FET(IGFET). The IGFET is more commonly known as ametal–oxide–semiconductor FET(MOSFET), reflecting its original construction from layers of metal (the gate), oxide (the insulation), and semiconductor. Unlike IGFETs, the JFET gate forms ap–n diodewith the channel which lies between the source and drains. Functionally, this makes the n-channel JFET the solid-state equivalent of the vacuum tubetriodewhich, similarly, forms a diode between itsgridandcathode. Also, both devices operate in thedepletion-mode, they both have a high input impedance, and they both conduct current under the control of an input voltage.
Metal–semiconductor FETs (MESFETs) are JFETs in which thereverse biasedp–n junction is replaced by ametal–semiconductor junction. These, and the HEMTs (high-electron-mobility transistors, or HFETs), in which a two-dimensional electron gas with very high carrier mobility is used for charge transport, are especially suitable for use at very high frequencies (several GHz).
FETs are further divided intodepletion-modeandenhancement-modetypes, depending on whether the channel is turned on or off with zero gate-to-source voltage. For enhancement mode, the channel is off at zero bias, and a gate potential canenhancethe conduction. For the depletion mode, the channel is on at zero bias, and a gate potential (of the opposite polarity) candepletethe channel, reducing conduction. For either mode, a more positive gate voltage corresponds to a higher current for n-channel devices and a lower current for p-channel devices. Nearly all JFETs are depletion-mode because the diode junctions would forward bias and conduct if they were enhancement-mode devices, while most IGFETs are enhancement-mode types.

## Metal–oxide–semiconductor FET (MOSFET)
The metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET, MOS-FET, or MOS FET), also known as the metal–oxide–silicon transistor (MOS transistor, or MOS),[65]is a type of field-effect transistor that isfabricatedby thecontrolled oxidationof a semiconductor, typicallysilicon. It has an insulatedgate, whose voltage determines the conductivity of the device. This ability to change conductivity with the amount of applied voltage can be used for amplifying or switching electronicsignals. The MOSFET is by far the most common transistor, and the basic building block of most modernelectronics.[82]The MOSFET accounts for 99.9% of all transistors in the world.[96]

## Bipolar junction transistor (BJT)
Bipolar transistors are so named because they conduct by using both majority and minoritycarriers. The bipolar junction transistor, the first type of transistor to be mass-produced, is a combination of two junction diodes and is formed of either a thin layer of p-type semiconductor sandwiched between two n-type semiconductors (an n–p–n transistor), or a thin layer of n-type semiconductor sandwiched between two p-type semiconductors (a p–n–p transistor). This construction produces twop–n junctions: a base–emitter junction and a base–collector junction, separated by a thin region of semiconductor known as the base region. (Two junction diodes wired together without sharing an intervening semiconducting region will not make a transistor.)
BJTs have three terminals, corresponding to the three layers of semiconductor—anemitter, abase, and acollector. They are useful inamplifiersbecause the currents at the emitter and collector are controllable by a relatively small base current.[97]In an n–p–n transistor operating in the active region, the emitter–base junction is forward-biased (electronsandholesrecombine at the junction), and the base–collector junction is reverse-biased (electrons and holes are formed at, and move away from, the junction), and electrons are injected into the base region. Because the base is narrow, most of these electrons will diffuse into the reverse-biased base–collector junction and be swept into the collector; perhaps one-hundredth of the electrons will recombine in the base, which is the dominant mechanism in the base current. Since the base is doped lightly (in comparison to the emitter and collector regions), recombination rates are low, permitting more carriers to diffuse across the base region. By controlling the number of electrons that can leave the base, the number of electrons entering the collector can be controlled.[97]Collector current is approximately β (common-emitter current gain) times the base current. It is typically greater than 100 for small-signal transistors but can be smaller in transistors designed for high-power applications.
Unlike the field-effect transistor (see below), the BJT is a low-input-impedance device. Also, as the base–emitter voltage (VBE) is increased, the base–emitter current and hence the collector–emitter current (ICE) increase exponentially according to theShockley diode modeland theEbers–Moll model. Because of this exponential relationship, the BJT has a highertransconductancethan the FET.
Bipolar transistors can be made to conduct by exposure to light because the absorption of photons in the base region generates a photocurrent that acts as a base current; the collector current is approximately β times the photocurrent. Devices designed for this purpose have a transparent window in the package and are calledphototransistors.

## Usage of MOSFETs and BJTs
TheMOSFETis by far the most widely used transistor for bothdigital circuitsas well asanalog circuits,[98]accounting for 99.9% of all transistors in the world.[96]Thebipolar junction transistor(BJT) was previously the most commonly used transistor during the 1950s to 1960s. Even after MOSFETs became widely available in the 1970s, the BJT remained the transistor of choice for many analog circuits such as amplifiers because of their greater linearity, up until MOSFET devices (such aspower MOSFETs,LDMOSandRF CMOS) replaced them for mostpower electronicapplications in the 1980s. Inintegrated circuits, the desirable properties of MOSFETs allowed them to capture nearly all market share for digital circuits in the 1970s. Discrete MOSFETs (typically power MOSFETs) can be applied in transistor applications, including analog circuits, voltage regulators, amplifiers, power transmitters, and motor drivers.

## Device identification
Three major identification standards are used for designating transistor devices. In each, the alphanumeric prefix provides clues to the type of the device.

## Joint Electron Device Engineering Council (JEDEC)
TheJEDECpart numbering scheme evolved in the 1960s in the United States. The JEDECEIA-370transistor device numbers usually start with2N, indicating a three-terminal device.[113]Dual-gatefield-effect transistorsare four-terminal devices, and begin with 3N. The prefix is followed by a two-, three- or four-digit number with no significance as to device properties, although early devices with low numbers tend to be germanium devices. For example,2N3055is a silicon n–p–n power transistor, 2N1301 is a p–n–p germanium switching transistor. A letter suffix, such as A, is sometimes used to indicate a newer variant, but rarely gain groupings.

## Japanese Industrial Standard (JIS)
In Japan, theJIS semiconductor designation(|JIS-C-7012), labels transistor devices starting with2S,[114]e.g., 2SD965, but sometimes the 2S prefix is not marked on the package–a 2SD965 might only be markedD965and a 2SC1815 might be listed by a supplier as simplyC1815. This series sometimes has suffixes, such as R, O, BL, standing for red, orange, blue, etc., to denote variants, such as tighterhFE(gain) groupings.

## European Electronic Component Manufacturers Association (EECA)
The European Electronic Component Manufacturers Association (EECA) uses a numbering scheme that was inherited fromPro Electronwhen it merged with EECA in 1983. This scheme begins with two letters: the first gives the semiconductor type (A for germanium, B for silicon, and C for materials like GaAs); the second letter denotes the intended use (A for diode, C for general-purpose transistor, etc.). A three-digit sequence number (or one letter and two digits, for industrial types) follows. With early devices this indicated the case type. Suffixes may be used, with a letter (e.g. C often means highhFE, such as in: BC549C[115]) or other codes may follow to show gain (e.g. BC327-25) or voltage rating (e.g. BUK854-800A[116]). The more common prefixes are:

## Proprietary
Manufacturers of devices may have their proprietary numbering system, for exampleCK722. Since devices aresecond-sourced, a manufacturer's prefix (like MPF in MPF102, which originally would denote aMotorolaFET) now is an unreliable indicator of who made the device. Some proprietary naming schemes adopt parts of other naming schemes, for example, a PN2222A is a (possiblyFairchild Semiconductor) 2N2222A in a plastic case (but a PN108 is a plastic version of a BC108, not a 2N108, while the PN100 is unrelated to other xx100 devices).
Military part numbers sometimes are assigned their codes, such as theBritish Military CV Naming System.
Manufacturers buying large numbers of similar parts may have them supplied withhouse numbers, identifying a particular purchasing specification and not necessarily a device with a standardized registered number. For example, an HP part 1854,0053 is a (JEDEC) 2N2218 transistor[117][118]which is also assigned the CV number: CV7763[119]

## Naming problems
With so many independent naming schemes, and the abbreviation of part numbers when printed on the devices, ambiguity sometimes occurs. For example, two different devices may be marked J176 (one the J176 low-powerJFET, the other the higher-poweredMOSFET2SJ176).
As older through-hole transistors are given surface-mount packaged counterparts, they tend to be assigned many different part numbers because manufacturers have their systems to cope with the variety inpinoutarrangements and options for dual or matched n–p–n + p–n–p devices in one pack. So even when the original device (such as a 2N3904) may have been assigned by a standards authority, and well known by engineers over the years, the new versions are far from standardized in their naming.

## Semiconductor material
The first BJTs were made fromgermanium(Ge).Silicon(Si) types currently predominate but certain advanced microwave and high-performance versions now employ thecompound semiconductormaterialgallium arsenide(GaAs) and thesemiconductor alloysilicon–germanium(SiGe). Single-element semiconductor material (Ge and Si) is described aselemental.
Rough parameters for the most common semiconductor materials used to make transistors are given in the adjacent table. These parameters will vary with an increase in temperature, electric field, impurity level, strain, and sundry other factors.
Thejunction forward voltageis the voltage applied to the emitter-base junction of a BJT to make the base conduct a specified current. The current increases exponentially as the junction forward voltage is increased. The values given in the table are typical for a current of 1 mA (the same values apply to semiconductor diodes). The lower the junction forward voltage the better, as this means that less power is required to drive the transistor. The junction forward voltage for a given current decreases with an increase in temperature. For a typical silicon junction, the change is −2.1 mV/°C.[120]In some circuits special compensating elements (sensistors) must be used to compensate for such changes.
The density of mobile carriers in the channel of a MOSFET is a function of the electric field forming the channel and of various other phenomena such as the impurity level in the channel. Some impurities, called dopants, are introduced deliberately in making a MOSFET, to control the MOSFET electrical behavior.
Theelectron mobilityandhole mobilitycolumns show the average speed that electrons and holes diffuse through the semiconductor material with anelectric fieldof 1 volt per meter applied across the material. In general, the higher the electron mobility the faster the transistor can operate. The table indicates that Ge is a better material than Si in this respect. However, Ge has four major shortcomings compared to silicon and gallium arsenide:
Because the electron mobility is higher than the hole mobility for all semiconductor materials, a given bipolarn–p–n transistortends to be swifter than an equivalentp–n–p transistor. GaAs has the highest electron mobility of the three semiconductors. It is for this reason that GaAs is used in high-frequency applications. A relatively recent[when?]FET development, thehigh-electron-mobility transistor(HEMT), has aheterostructure(junction between different semiconductor materials) of aluminium gallium arsenide (AlGaAs)-gallium arsenide (GaAs) which has twice the electron mobility of a GaAs-metal barrier junction. Because of their high speed and low noise, HEMTs are used in satellite receivers working at frequencies around 12 GHz. HEMTs based ongallium nitrideandaluminum gallium nitride(AlGaN/GaN HEMTs) provide still higher electron mobility and are being developed for various applications.
Maximumjunction temperaturevalues represent a cross-section taken from various manufacturers' datasheets. This temperature should not be exceeded or the transistor may be damaged.
Al–Si junctionrefers to the high-speed (aluminum-silicon) metal–semiconductor barrier diode, commonly known as aSchottky diode. This is included in the table because some silicon power IGFETs have aparasiticreverse Schottky diode formed between the source and drain as part of the fabrication process. This diode can be a nuisance, but sometimes it is used in the circuit.

## Packaging
Discrete transistors can be individually packaged transistors or unpackaged transistor chips.
Transistors come in many differentsemiconductor packages(see image). The two main categories arethrough-hole(orleaded), andsurface-mount, also known assurface-mount device(SMD). Theball grid array(BGA) is the latest surface-mount package. It has solder balls on the underside in place of leads. Because they are smaller and have shorter interconnections, SMDs have better high-frequency characteristics but lower power ratings.
Transistor packages are made of glass, metal, ceramic, or plastic. The package often dictates the power rating and frequency characteristics. Power transistors have larger packages that can be clamped toheat sinksfor enhanced cooling. Additionally, most power transistors have the collector or drain physically connected to the metal enclosure. At the other extreme, some surface-mountmicrowavetransistors are as small as grains of sand.
Often a given transistor type is available in several packages. Transistor packages are mainly standardized, but the assignment of a transistor's functions to the terminals is not: other transistor types can assign other functions to the package's terminals. Even for the same transistor type the terminal assignment can vary (normally indicated by a suffix letter to the part number, q.e. BC212L and BC212K).
Nowadays most transistors come in a wide range of SMT packages. In comparison, the list of available through-hole packages is relatively small. Here is a short list of the most common through-hole transistors packages in alphabetical order:
ATV, E-line, MRT, HRT, SC-43, SC-72, TO-3, TO-18, TO-39, TO-92, TO-126, TO220, TO247, TO251, TO262, ZTX851.
Unpackaged transistor chips (die) may be assembled into hybrid devices.[121]TheIBM SLTmodule of the 1960s is one example of such a hybrid circuit module using glass passivated transistor (and diode) die.  Other packaging techniques for discrete transistors as chips includedirect chip attach(DCA) andchip-on-board(COB).[121]

## Flexible transistors
Researchers have made several kinds of flexible transistors, includingorganic field-effect transistors.[122][123][124]Flexible transistors are useful in some kinds offlexible displaysand otherflexible electronics.