## Winter Olympic Games
TheWinter Olympic Games(French:Jeux olympiques d'hiver),[a]also known as theOlympic Winter Gamesor simply theWinter Olympics, is a major internationalmulti-sport eventheld once every four years for sports practiced on snow and ice. The Winter Olympics are usually held in February, during the winter season of the Northern Hemisphere. The IOC is the governing body of theOlympic Movement, with theOlympic Charterdefining its structure and authority.MilanandCortina d'Ampezzoof Italy hosted in 2026. The next games are scheduled to be held between 1 and 17 February 2030 at theFrench Alps.[2][3]
The original five Winter Olympic Sports (consisting of nine disciplines) werebobsleigh,curling,ice hockey,Nordic skiing(consisting of the disciplinesmilitary patrol,[b]cross-country skiing,Nordic combined, andski jumping), andskating(consisting of the disciplinesfigure skatingandspeed skating).[c]The Winter Olympic Games have evolved since their inception. Sports and disciplines have been added and some of them, such asalpine skiing,luge,short track speed skating,freestyle skiing,skeleton, andsnowboarding, have earned a permanent spot on the Olympic program. Some others, includingcurlingandbobsleigh, have been discontinued and later reintroduced; others have been permanently discontinued, such asmilitary patrol, though the modern Winter Olympic sport ofbiathlonis descended from it.[b]Still others, such asspeed skiing,bandyandskijoring, weredemonstration sportsbut never incorporated as Olympic sports.
The first Winter Olympic Games, the1924 Winter Olympics, were held inChamonix, France. The modern Olympic Games were inspired by theancient Olympic Games, which were held inOlympia, Greece, from 776 BCE to 394 CE. TheBaron Pierre de Coubertinof France founded theInternational Olympic Committee(IOC) 1,500 years later in 1894, leading to the first modernSummer Olympic Gamesin Athens, Greece in 1896. The Games were held every four years from 1924 to 1936, interrupted in 1940 and 1944 byWorld War II, and resumed in1948. Until 1992, theSummer Olympic Gamesand the Winter Olympic Games were held in the same year. A decision to change this was made in 1986, when during the91st International Olympic Committee session, IOC members decided to alternate the Summer Olympic Games and the Winter Olympic Games on separate four-year cycles in even-numbered years. Also, at that same congress it was decided that1992 Winter Olympicswould be the last to be held in the same year as the Summer Games and that to change the rotation, the games that would be held in 1996 would be brought forward by two years, being scheduled to1994, the same four-year cycle as theCommonwealth Games, and the men'sFIFA World Cup. After those games, the next were to beheld in 1998when the four-year Olympic Cycle resumed.[8][9]
The Winter Olympic Games have been hosted on three continents by thirteen countries, all of whom are located in theNorthern Hemisphere. They have been held four times in theUnited States(1932,1960,1980, and2002), three times each inFrance(1924,1968, and1992) andItaly(1956,2006, and2026), and twice each inSwitzerland(1928and1948),Austria(1964and1976),Norway(1952and1994),Japan(1972and1998) andCanada(1988and2010). Also, the Winter Olympic Games have been held once each inGermany(1936),Yugoslavia(1984),Russia(2014),South Korea(2018), andChina(2022).
As of 2026[update], twelve countries have participated in every Winter Olympic Games –Austria,Canada,Finland,France,Great Britain,Hungary,Italy,Norway,Poland,Sweden,Switzerland, and theUnited States. Also,Czechoslovakiaparticipated in all Winter Olympic Games before itsdissolutionand its successors,Czech RepublicandSlovakiahave participated in all Winter Games thereafter. Six of these countries have won medals at every Winter Olympic Games – Austria, Canada, Finland, Norway, Sweden, and the United States. The only country to have won a gold medal at every Winter Olympic Games is the United States.
Norway leads theall-time medal recordfor the Winter Olympic Games, followed by the United States and Germany. When including defunct states, Germany (including the former countries of West Germany and East Germany) leads, followed by Norway, Russia (including the former Soviet Union) and the United States. Norway holds the record for most gold medals in any one Winter Olympics, with 18 in 2026, and overall medals, with 41 in 2026.

## Early years
A predecessor, theNordic Games, were organised by GeneralViktor Gustaf BalckinStockholm, Sweden, in 1901 and were held again in 1903 and 1905 and then every fourth year thereafter until 1926.[10]Balck was a charter member of theIOCand a close friend ofOlympic GamesfounderPierre de Coubertin. He attempted to have winter sports, specificallyfigure skating, added to the Olympic programme but was unsuccessful until the1908 Summer Olympicsin London.[10]Four figure skating events were contested, at whichUlrich Salchow(10-time world champion) andMadge Syerswon the individual titles.[11][12]
Three years later, Italian countEugenio Brunetta d'Usseauxproposed that the IOC stage a week of winter sports included as part of the1912 Summer Olympicsin Stockholm, Sweden. The organisers opposed this idea because they desired to protect the integrity of the Nordic Games and were concerned about a lack of facilities for winter sports.[13][14][15]
The idea was resurrected for the1916 Games, which were to be held in Berlin, Germany. Awinter sports weekwithspeed skating, figure skating,ice hockeyandNordic skiingwere planned, but the 1916 Olympics was cancelled after the outbreak ofWorld War I.[14]

## 1920 to 1936
The first Olympics after the war, the1920 Summer Olympics, were held inAntwerp, Belgium,[16]and featured figure skating[17]and an ice hockey tournament. Germany, Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria and Turkey were banned from competing in the games. At theIOC Congressheld the following year it was decided that the host nation of the1924 Summer Olympics, France, would host a separate "International Winter Sports Week" under the patronage of the IOC.Chamonixwas chosen to host this week (actually 11 days) of events.
The 1924 gamesin Chamonix proved to be a success when more than 250 athletes from 16 nations competed in 16 events.[18]Athletesfrom Finlandand Norwaywon 28 medals, more than the rest of the participating nations combined.[19]The first gold medal awarded was won byCharles Jewtrawof the United States in the 500-meter speed skate.Sonja Henieof Norway, at just 11 years old, competed in the ladies' figure skating and, although finishing last, became popular with fans.Gillis Grafströmof Sweden defended his 1920 gold medal[17]in men's figure skating, becoming the first Olympian to win gold medals in both Summer and Winter Olympics.[20]Germany remained banned until 1925, and instead hosted a series of games calledDeutsche Kampfspiele, starting with the winter edition of 1922 (which predated the first Winter Olympics). In 1925 the IOC decided to create a separate winter event and the 1924 games in Chamonix were retroactively designated as the first Winter Olympics.[14][18]
St. Moritz, Switzerland, was appointed by the IOC to host thesecond Winter Gamesin 1928.[21]Fluctuating weather conditions challenged the hosts. Theopening ceremonywas held in a blizzard while warm weather conditions plagued sporting events throughout the rest of the games.[22]Because of the weather the 10,000 metre speed-skating event had to be abandoned and officially cancelled.[23]The weather was not the only noteworthy aspect of the 1928 games:Sonja HenieofNorwayreturned to the Winter Olympics to make history when she won theladies' figure skatingat the age of 15. She became the youngest Olympic champion in history, a distinction she held for 70 years, and went on to defend her title at the next two Winter Olympics.[24]Gillis Grafströmwon his third consecutive figure skating gold[25]and went on to win silver in 1932,[26]becoming the most decorated men's figure skater to date.
Thenext Winter Olympics, held in Lake Placid, New York, United States was the first to be hosted outside of Europe. Seventeen nations and 252 athletes participated.[27]This was less than in 1928, as the journey toLake Placidwas too long and expensive for some European nations that encountered financial problems in the midst of theGreat Depression. The athletes competed in fourteen events in four sports.[27]Virtually no snow fell for two months before the Games, and there was not enough snow to hold all the events until mid-January.[28]Sonja Henie defended her Olympic title,[26]andEddie Eaganof the United States, who had been an Olympic champion in boxing in 1920,[29]won the gold medal in themen's bobsleigh event[30]to joinGillis Grafströmas the only athletes to have won gold medals in both theSummerand Winter Olympics.[27]Eagan has the distinction as the only Olympian as of 2020 to accomplish this feat in different sports.[31]
The German towns ofGarmisch and Partenkirchenjoined to organise the1936 Winter Games, held from 6–16 February.[32]This was the last time theSummerand Winter Olympics were held in the same country in the same year.Alpine skiingmade its Olympic debut, but skiing teachers were barred from entering because they were considered to be professionals.[33]Because of this decisionthe Swissand Austrianskiers refused to compete at the games.[33]
World War IIinterrupted the Winter Olympics. The1940 gameshad been awarded toSapporo, Japan, but the decision was rescinded in 1938 because of the Japaneseinvasionof China. The games were then to be held at Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, but the 1940 games were cancelled following the Germaninvasion of Polandin 1939.[34]Due to the ongoing war, the1944 games, originally scheduled forCortina D'Ampezzo, Italy, were cancelled.[35]

## 1948 to 1962
St. Moritz was selected to host thefirst post-war games, in 1948. Switzerland's neutrality had protected the town during World War II, and most venues from the 1928 games remained in place, which made St. Moritz a logical choice. It became the first city to host a Winter Olympics twice.[36]Twenty-eight countries competed in Switzerland, but athletes from Germany and Japan were not invited because their Olympic committees were not yet recognized. They returned in 1952.[37]Some controversy emerged when two hockey teams from theUnited Statesarrived, both claiming to be the legitimate U.S. Olympic hockey representative. TheOlympic flagpresented at the1920 Summer Olympicsin Antwerp was stolen, as was its replacement. There was unprecedented parity at these games, during which 10 countries won gold medals—more than any games to that point.[38]
TheOlympic Flametradition wasintroduced at the 1952 gamesinOslo: the flame was lit in the fireplace of the house of 19th-century Norwegian skiing pioneerSondre Nordheimand the first Winter torch relay was conducted by 94 torchbearers entirely on their skis.[39][40]Bandy, a popular sport in the Nordic countries, was featured as a demonstration sport, thoughonly Norway,Sweden,and Finlandfielded teams. Norwegian athletes won 17 medals, which outpaced all the other nations.[41]They were led byHjalmar Andersenwho won three gold medals in four events in thespeed skatingcompetition.[42]
After not being able to host the games in 1944,Cortina d'Ampezzowas selected to organise the1956 Winter Olympics. At the opening ceremonies the final torchbearer, Guido Caroli, entered theOlympic Stadiumon ice skates. As he skated around the stadium his skate caught on a cable and he fell and burned his arm, nearly extinguishing the flame. He was able to recover and light the cauldron.[43]These were the first Winter Games to be televised, and the first Olympics ever broadcast to an international audience, though no television rights were sold until the1960 Summer OlympicsinRome.[44]The Cortina games were used to test the feasibility of televising large sporting events.[44]
TheSoviet Unionmade its Olympic debut and had an immediate impact, winning more medals than any other nation.[45]The Soviets' immediate success might be explained by the advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete". TheUSSRentered teams of athletes who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but many of whom were in reality paid by the state to train full-time.[46][47]Chiharu Igayawon the first Winter Olympics medalfor Japanand the continent of Asia when he placed second in the slalom.[48]
The IOC awarded the1960 OlympicstoSquaw Valley, United States.[49]The announcement of its selection came as a shock as the resort nearLake Tahoewas undeveloped and unknown outside the United States. About US$80,000,000 was spent over four years to build cutting-edge infrastructure from scratch. The layout was designed to be intimate, allowing spectators and competitors to reach most of the venues on foot.[50][51]The opening and closing ceremonies were the firsts produced byWalt DisneyCompany.[52]The Squaw Valley Olympics was the first Winter Games to have a dedicated athletes' village,[53][54]the first to use a computer (courtesy ofIBM) to tabulate results, and the first to feature female speed skating events. This edition is the only one to date to not have bobsleigh competitions, as the number of countries registered in the event was insufficient and the costs of building the track were too high for the Organizing Committee. To replace the event, an extra edition from theFIBT World Championship was held.[52]

## 1964 to 1980
The Austrian city ofInnsbruckwas the host in1964. For the first time, the Olympic torch of the Winter Olympic Games was lit at the traditional ritual held in the temple of Olympia. Although Innsbruck was a traditional winter sports resort, unprojected warm weather caused a lack of snow and organisers were unable to save enough snow to be used during the Games, and the Austrian army was enlisted to transport snow and ice from other places to the sports venues.[52]Sovietspeed-skaterLidia Skoblikovamade history by winning all four-speed skating events. Her career total of six gold medals set a record for Winter Olympics athletes.[52]Also, for the first timeLugewas added to the Olympic program, but the sport received bad publicity when a competitor was killed in a pre-Olympic training run.[55][56]
Held in the French town ofGrenoble, the1968 Winter Olympicswere the first Olympic Games to be broadcast in colour. There were 1,158 athletes from 37 nations competing in 35 events.[57]Frenchalpine ski racerJean-Claude Killybecame only the second person to win all the men's alpine skiing events. Due to the high interest around the world, the organising committee sold television rights for US$2 million, which was more than twice the cost of the broadcast rights for the Innsbruck Games.[58]For the first time, the organizers chose to decentralize the Games to save costs and the events were spread across three long distances clusters, which led to the need to build three Olympic Villages. Along with the high costs, the organisers claimed that this was necessary to accommodate technological advances, however, critics disputed this, alleging that the layout would incorporate the best possible venues for television broadcasts at the athletes' expense.[58]
The1972 Winter Games, held inSapporo, Japan,[59]were the first to be hosted on a continent other than North America or Europe. The issue of professionalism was disputed during these Games when a number of alpine skiers were found to have participated in a ski camp atMammoth Mountainin the United States; three days before the opening ceremony, IOC presidentAvery Brundagethreatened to bar the skiers from competing in the Games as he insisted that they were no longer amateurs having benefited financially from their status as athletes.[60]Eventually onlyAustrianKarl Schranz, who earned more than the other skiers, was excluded from the competition.[61]Canada boycotted the1972and the1976 ice hockey tournamentsin protest at not being able to use players from professional leagues.[62]Canadian authorities also accused the Soviet Union of using state-sponsored athletes, who were de facto professionals.[63]Francisco Fernández Ochoabecame the first and, as of 2022, the onlySpaniardto win a Winter Olympic gold medal when he triumphed in theslalom.[64]
The1976 Winter Olympicshad initially been awarded in 1970 toDenver,Coloradoin the United States. These Games would have coincided with the year of Colorado'scentennialand theUnited States Bicentennial. However, the increasing costs of the event and the oil crisis led to a local plebiscite held in November 1972, that resulted in the city withdrawing from hosting the Games, as the people of Colorado voted against public funding of the Games by a 3:2 margin.[65][66]The IOC responded by offering the Games toVancouver-Garibaldi,British ColumbiainCanada, which had previously been a finalist bid for the 1976 Games. However, a change in the provincial government resulted in an administration that did not support the Olympic bid, so the IOC's offer was rejected.[67]
Salt Lake City, previously a candidate for the 1972 Winter Olympics, then put itself forward, but a tense political situation led IOC to invite Innsbruck to host the 1976 Games, as all the infrastructure used during the 1964 Games had been maintained. Despite only having half the usual time to prepare for the Games, Innsbruck accepted the invitation to replace Denver in February 1973.[67]During the opening ceremonies, two cauldrons were lit because it was the second time that the Austrian town had hosted the Winter Games.[67]The 1976 Games featured the firstcombination bobsleigh-and-luge track, in neighbouringIgls.[64]TheSoviet Unionwon its fourth consecutive ice hockey gold medal.[67]
In 1980the Winter Olympics returned to Lake Placid, which had hosted the 1932 Games. Unlike previous editions, Lake Placid had no competitors in this bid process.Cyprusmade their Olympic debut at the games. The People's Republic of China andCosta Rica, the first tropical nation, competed for the first time at the Winter Games. TheRepublic of Chinaboycotted the Games, in protest of the IOC's recognition of thePeople's Republic of Chinaas the only "China", and its request for the Republic of China to compete as "Chinese Taipei". The PRC, on the other hand, returned to the Olympics for the first time since 1952 and made its Winter Olympic debut.[68][69]
Americanspeed-skaterEric Heidenset either an Olympic or World record in every one of the fiveeventsin which he competed, winning a total of five individual gold medals and breaking the record for most individual golds in a single Olympics (both Summer and Winter).[70]Hanni Wenzelwon both the slalom and giant slalom and her country,Liechtenstein, became the smallest nation to produce an Olympic gold medallist.[71]In the "Miracle on Ice", theAmerican hockey teamcomposed of college players beat the favoured seasoned professionals from theSoviet Union, and progressed to eventually win the gold medal.[72][d]

## 1984 to 1998
Sapporo, Japan, andGothenburg, Sweden, were front-runners to host the1984 Winter Olympics. It was therefore a surprise whenSarajevo, Yugoslavia, was selected as host.[74]The Games were well-organised and not affected by the run-up to thewarthat engulfed the country eight years later.[75]A total of 49 nations and 1,272 athletes participated in 39 events. Host nation Yugoslavia won its first Olympic medal when alpine skierJure Frankowon silver in the giant slalom. Another sporting highlight was the free dance performance ofBritishice dancersJayne TorvillandChristopher Dean; theirBoléroroutine received unanimous perfect scores for artistic impression, earning them the gold medal.[75]
In 1988, the Canadian city ofCalgaryhosted thefirst Winter Olympicsto span three weekends, lasting for a total of 16 days.[76]New events were added in ski-jumping and speed skating, while future Olympic sports curling,short track speed skatingandfreestyle skiingmade their debut appearance as demonstration sports. The speed skating events were held indoors for the first time, on theOlympic Oval. Dutch skaterYvonne van Gennipwon three gold medals and set two world records, beating skaters from the favouredEast German teamin every race.[77]
Her medal total was equalled byFinnishski jumperMatti Nykänen, who won all three events in his sport.Alberto Tomba,an Italianskier, made his Olympic debut by winning both the giant slalom and slalom. East GermanChrista Rothenburgerwon the women's 1,000 metre speed skating event. Seven months later she would earn a silver in track cycling at theSummer GamesinSeoul, to become the only athlete to win medals in both a Summer and Winter Olympics in the same year.[76]The 1988 games are well remembered in popular culture from two films based on its events:Cool Runningsabout theJamaican bobsled team; andEddie the Eagleabout British ski jumperMichael Edwards, who finished last but set a British record of 73.5 metres.
The1992 Winter Gameswere the last to be held in the same year as theSummer Games.[78]They were hosted in the FrenchSavoieregion, with 18 events held in the city ofAlbertvilleand the remaining events spread out over the Savoie.[78]Political changes of the time were reflected in the composition of the Olympic teams competing in France: this was the first Games to be held after thefall of Communismand thefall of the Berlin Wall, and Germany competed as a single nation for the first time since the 1964 Games.[79]
FormerYugoslavianrepublicsCroatiaandSloveniamade their debuts as independent nations; most of the formerSovietrepublics still competed as a single team known as theUnified Team, but theBaltic Statesmade independent appearances for the first time since before World War II.[79]At 16 years old,Finnishski jumperToni Nieminenmade history by becoming the youngest male Winter Olympic champion.[80]New ZealandskierAnnelise Cobergerbecame the first Winter Olympic medallist from the southern hemisphere when she won a silver medal in the women's slalom.
The1994 Winter Olympics, held inLillehammer, Norway, were the first Winter Games to be held in a different year from the Summer Games. This change resulted from the decision reached in the91st IOC Session (1986)to separate the Summer and Winter Games and place them in alternating even-numbered years.[81]This allowed the IOC to space out the logistical and financial costs of the two events from one another, and generate advertising revenue from the Games every two years instead of four.[82]Lillehammer is the northernmost city to ever host the Winter Games. It was the second time the Games were held in Norway, after the1952 Winter OlympicsinOslo, and the first time theOlympic Trucewas observed. As a result, after thedissolution of Czechoslovakiain 1993, theCzech RepublicandSlovakiamade their Olympic debuts.[83]
The women's figure skating competition drew media attention whenAmerican skaterNancy Kerriganwas injured on 6 January 1994, in an assault planned by the ex-husband of opponentTonya Harding.[84]Both skaters competed in the Games, but the gold medal was narrowly won byOksana Baiulwho becameUkraine's first Olympic champion, while Kerrigan won the silver medal.[85][86]Johann Olav KossofNorwaywon three gold medals, coming first in all of the distance speed skating events.[87]
13-year-oldKim Yoon-Mibecame the youngest-ever Olympic gold medallist when South Korea won the women's 3,000-metre speed skating relay.Bjørn Dæhliof Norway won a medal in four out of five cross-country events, becoming the most decorated Winter Olympian until then.Russiawon the most events, with eleven gold medals, while Norway achieved 26 podium finishes, collecting the most medals overall on home ground.Juan Antonio Samaranchdescribed Lillehammer as "the best Olympic Winter Games ever" in his closing ceremony speech.[88]
The1998 Winter Olympicswere held in the Japanese city ofNaganoand were the first Games to host more than 2,000 athletes.[89]TheNational Hockey Leagueallowed its players to participate in the men'sice hockey tournamentfor the first time, and theCzech Republicwon the tournament. Women's ice hockey made its debut, and theUnited Stateswon the gold medal.[90]Bjørn DæhlieofNorwaywon three gold medals in Nordic skiing, becoming the most decorated Winter Olympic athlete, with eight gold medals and twelve medals overall.[89][91]AustrianHermann Maiersurvived a crash during the downhill competition and returned to win gold in thesuper-Gand the giant slalom.[89]Tara Lipinskiof theUnited States, aged just 15, became the youngest ever female gold medallist in an individual event when she won theLadies' Singles, a record that had stood sinceSonja HenieofNorwaywon the same event, also aged 15, inSt. Moritz in 1928. New world records were set inspeed skatinglargely due to the introduction of theclap skate.[92]

## 2002 to 2026
After a tumultuous host city process, the2002 Winter Olympicswere held inSalt Lake City, United States. 2,399 athletes from 77 National Olympic Committees participated in 78 events in 7 sports.[93]These Games were the first to take place since theSeptember 11 attacksof 2001, which meant a higher degree of security to avoid a terrorist attack. The opening ceremony saw signs of theaftermath of the events of that day, including the flag that flew atGround Zero, and honour guards of NYPD andFDNYmembers.[94]
GermanGeorg Hacklwon a silver in the singles luge, becoming the first athlete in Olympic history to win medals in the same individual event in five consecutive Olympics.[93]Canadaachieved an unprecedented double by winning both the men's and women'sice hockeygold medals.[93]Canada became embroiled withRussiain acontroversythat involved the judging of thepairs figure skatingcompetition. The Russian pair ofYelena BerezhnayaandAnton Sikharulidzecompeted against the Canadian pair ofJamie SaléandDavid Pelletierfor the gold medal.[95]
The Canadians appeared to have skated well enough to win the competition, yet the Russians were awarded the gold. TheFrenchjudge,Marie-Reine Le Gougne, awarded the gold to the Russians. An investigation revealed that she had been pressured to give the gold to the Russian pair regardless of how they skated; in return, the Russian judge would look favourably on the French entrants in the ice dancing competition.[95]
The IOC decided to award both pairs the gold medal in a secondmedal ceremonyheld later in the Games.[96]AustralianSteven Bradburybecame the first gold medallist from the southern hemisphere when he won the 1,000 metre short-track speed skating event.[97]
The Italian city ofTurinhosted the2006 Winter Olympics. It was the second time that Italy had hosted the Winter Olympic Games.South Koreanathletes won 10 medals, including 6 gold in the short-track speed skating events.Sun-Yu Jinwon three gold medals while her teammateHyun-Soo Ahnwon three gold medals and a bronze.[98]In the women'sCross-Countryteam pursuitCanadianSara Rennerbroke one of her poles and, when he saw her dilemma,NorwegiancoachBjørnar Håkensmoendecided to lend her a pole. In so doing she was able to help her team win a silver medal in the event at the expense of the Norwegian team, who finished fourth.[98][99]
On winning the Super-G,Kjetil-Andre Aamodtof Norway became the most decorated ski racer of all time with 4 gold and 8 overall medals. He is also the only ski racer to have won the same event at three Olympics, winning the Super-G in1992,2002, and2006.Claudia PechsteinofGermanybecame the first speed skater to earn nine career medals.[98]
In February 2009, Pechstein tested positive for"blood manipulation"and received a two-year suspension, which she appealed. TheCourt of Arbitration for Sportupheld her suspension but a Swiss court ruled that she could compete for a spot on the2010 German Olympic team.[100]This ruling was brought to the Swiss Federal Tribunal, which overturned the lower court's ruling and precluded her from competing in Vancouver.[101]
In 2003, the IOC awarded the2010 Winter OlympicstoVancouver, thus allowing Canada to host its second Winter Olympics. With a population of more than 2.5 million people Vancouver is the largest metropolitan area to ever host a Winter Olympic Games.[102]Over 2,500 athletes from 82 countries participated in 86 events.[103]The death ofGeorgianlugerNodar Kumaritashviliin a training run on the day of the opening ceremonies resulted in theWhistler Sliding Centrechanging the track layout on safety grounds.[104]
Norwegiancross-country skierMarit Bjørgenwon five medals in the six cross-country events on the women's programme. She finished the Olympics with three golds, a silver and a bronze.[105]For the first time,Canadawon a gold medal at an Olympic Games it hosted, having failed to do so at both the1976 Summer OlympicsinMontrealand the1988 Winter OlympicsinCalgary. In contrast to the lack of gold medals at these previous Olympics, the Canadian team finished first overall in gold medal wins,[106]and became the first host nation—sinceNorway in 1952—to lead the gold medal count, with 14 medals. In doing so, it also broke the record for the most gold medals won by a NOC at a single Winter Olympics (the previous was 13, set by theSoviet Union in 1976and matched byNorway in 2002).[107]
The Vancouver Games were notable for the poor performance of theRussianathletes. From their first Winter Olympics in1956to the 2006 Games, a Soviet or Russian delegation had never been outside the top five medal-winning nations, but in 2010 they finished sixth in total medals and eleventh in gold medals.PresidentDmitry Medvedevcalled for the resignation of top sports officials immediately after the Games.[108]Russia's disappointing performance at Vancouver is cited as the reason behind theenhancement of an already existing doping schemealleged to have been in operation at major events such as the 2014 Games at Sochi.[109]
The success of Asian countries stood in stark contrast to the under-performing Russian team, with Vancouver marking a high point for medals won by Asian countries. At the Albertville Games in 1992 the Asian countries had won fifteen medals, three of which were gold. In Vancouver, the total number of medals won by athletes from Asia had increased to thirty-one, with eleven of them being gold. The rise of Asian nations in Winter Olympics sports is due in part to the growth of winter sports programmes and the interest in winter sports in nations such as Kazakhstan, South Korea, Japan and China. These results increased the chances of an Asian city hosting the2018 Winter Olympicsthat would be held the following year.[110][111]
Sochi, Russia, was selected as the host city for the2014 Winter OlympicsoverSalzburg, Austria, andPyeongchang, South Korea. This was the first time that Russia had hosted a Winter Olympics.[112]The Games took place from 7 to 23 February 2014.[113]A record 2,800 athletes from 88 countries competed in 98 events. The Olympic Village and Olympic Stadium were located on theBlack Seacoast. All of the mountain venues were 50 kilometres (31 mi) away in the alpine region known asKrasnaya Polyana.[112]The Games were the most expensive until the date, with a cost of £30 billion (US$51 billion).
On the snow, Norwegian biathleteOle Einar Bjørndalentook two golds to bring his total tally of Olympic medals to 13, overtaking his compatriot Bjørn Dæhlie to become the most decorated Winter Olympian of all time. Another Norwegian, cross-country skierMarit Bjørgentook three golds; her total of ten Olympic medals tied her as the female Winter Olympian with most medals, alongsideRaisa SmetaninaandStefania Belmondo. SnowboarderAyumu Hiranobecame the youngest medallist on snow at the Winter Games when he took a silver in thehalfpipecompetition at the age of fifteen.[112]
On the ice, the Netherlands team dominated the speed skating events, taking 23 medals, four clean sweeps of the podium places and at least one medal in each of the twelve medal events.Ireen Wüstwas their most successful competitor, taking two golds and three silvers. In figure skating,Yuzuru Hanyubecame the first skater to break the 100-point barrier in the short programme on the way to winning the gold medal. Among the sledding disciplines, lugerArmin Zöggelertook a bronze, becoming the first Winter Olympian to secure a medal in six consecutive Games.[112]
Following their disappointing performance at the 2010 Games, and an investment of £600 million in elite sport,Russiainitially topped themedal table, taking 13 gold and 33 total medals.[114]However,Grigory Rodchenkov, the former head of the Russian national anti-doping laboratory, subsequently claimed that he had been involved in doping dozens of Russian competitors for the Games, and that he had been assisted by the RussianFederal Security Servicein opening and re-sealing bottles containing urine samples so that samples with banned substances could be replaced with "clean" urine.[115]
A subsequentinvestigationcommissioned by theWorld Anti-Doping Agencyled byRichard McLarenconcluded that a state-sponsored doping programme had operated in Russia from "at least late 2011 to 2015" across the "vast majority" of Summer and Winter Olympic sports.[116]On 5 December 2017, the IOC announced thatRussiawould compete as theOlympic Athletes from Russiaat the 2018 Winter Olympics[117]and by the end of 2017 theIOC Disciplinary Commissionhad disqualified 43 Russian athletes, stripping thirteen medals and knocking Russia from the top of the medal table, thus putting Norway in the lead.[118][119][120]However, nine medals were later returned, meaning that Russia reclaimed first place in the overall medal table, and joint first place with Norway in terms of gold medals.
On 6 July 2011,Pyeongchang, South Korea, was selected to host the2018 Winter OlympicsoverMunich, Germany, andAnnecy, France.[121]This was the first time thatSouth Koreahad been selected to host a Winter Olympics and it was the second time the Olympics were held in the country overall, after the1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul. The Games took place from 9 to 25 February 2018.[122]More than 2,900 athletes from 92 countries participated in 102 events. The main venue cluster was theAlpensia ResortinDaegwallyeong-myeon, while the ice events are held atGangneung Olympic Parkin Pyeongchang's neighbouring sea-city ofGangneung.
The lead-up to the 2018 Winter Olympics was affected bythe tensions between North and South Koreaand the ongoingRussian doping scandal. Despitetense relations,North Koreaagreed to participate in the Games, enter with South Korea during the opening ceremony as aunified Korea, and field aunified teaminwomen's ice hockey. Russian athletes, who complied with the IOC's doping regulations, were given the option to compete in Pyeongchang as "Olympic Athletes from Russia" (OAR).[117]
The Games saw the addition ofbig air snowboarding,mass startspeed skating,mixed doubles curling, and mixed teamalpine skiingto the programme. Like four years early, the Netherlands again dominated speed skating, winning gold medals in seven of the ten individual events. Dutch speed skaterSven Kramerwon gold in the men's 5000m event, becoming the only male speed skater to win the same Olympic event three times. On the snow, Norway led the medal tally in cross-country skiing, withMarit Bjørgenwinning bronze in the women's team sprint and gold in the 30-kilometre classical event, bringing her total Olympic medal haul to fifteen, the most won by any athlete (male or female) in Winter Olympics history.
Johannes Høsflot Klæboof Norway became the youngest ever male to win an Olympic gold in cross-country skiing when he won themen's sprintat age 21. He was also part of the Norwegian cross-country team winning the men’s relay and team sprint events.Noriaki Kasaiof Japan became the first athlete in history to participate in eight Winter Olympics when he took part in the ski jumping qualification the day before the opening of the Games.Ester Ledeckáof the Czech Republic won gold in the skiing super-G event and another gold in the snowboarding parallel giant slalom, making her the first female athlete to win Olympic gold medals in two sports at a single Winter Games.
Norway led the total medal standings with 39, the highest number of medals by a nation in any Winter Olympics, followed by Germany's 31 and Canada's 29. Host nationSouth Koreawon seventeen medals, five of them gold, its highest medal haul at a Winter Olympics.
Beijing, the capital of thePeople's Republic of China, was elected as the host city for the2022 Winter Olympicson 31 July 2015 at the128th IOC Session. Beijing became the first city ever to have hosted both the Summer and Winter Olympics. Like the Summer Olympics held six months earlier inTokyo, theCOVID-19 pandemicresulted in the implementation of strict health and safety protocols, including restrictions on public attendance at the Games. The Games included a record 109 events over 15 disciplines in seven sports with seven new medal events, including mixed team competitions in freestyle skiing aerials, ski jumping, and snowboard cross. The Games were held between 4 and 20 February 2022 at venues in Beijing andZhangjiakouwhich for the first time were run entirely onrenewable energy. Several of the events were impacted by temperatures as low as minus 20Celsiusand strong wind.
The first gold medal of the Games was won byTherese JohaugofNorwayin the women's skiathlon. Johaug had been excluded from the 2018 Winter Olympics in a controversial decision after having used a banned cream for sunburned lips. She went on to also win the women's 10 km and 30 km cross-country distances. Johannes Klæbo continued his dominance of the men’s cross-country sprint events by winning gold in the individual and team events. In the women's snowboard cross,Lindsey Jacobellisof theUnited Stateswon the gold, having lost the gold 16 years earlier at the2006 Winter Olympicsin Torino due to a brutal fall. On the ice, theNetherlandsdominated with a total of six gold medals andIrene Schoutenwinning the women's mass start, 3,000m and 5,000m distances.Nils van der PoelofSwedenwon the men's 5,000m and 10,000m distances, setting new Olympic records in both distances.Kamila ValievaofRussiawas allowed to compete in thewomen's figure skatingdespite a failed doping test in December 2021. She failed, however, to win an individual medal after falling in her final routine. Russia'steam gold medalremained in limbo for two years, pending investigation into Valieva's positive drug test, before theCourt of Arbitration for Sport(CAS) disqualified Valieva for four years retroactive to 25 December 2021, leading the ISU to re-allocate the medals, upgrading the United States to gold and Japan to silver while downgrading the ROC to bronze.[123]Finlandclaimed its first ice hockey gold, having beaten the Russian Olympic Committee in the men's final on the last day of the Games.
Norway was first in the overall medal standings, claiming 37 medals in total and 16 gold medals, the highest number of gold medals of any country in a single Winter Olympics. This was the tenth time Norway claimed the highest number of gold medals at the Winter Games.

## Future
The2026 Winter Olympicswas held inMilan-Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy, and took place from 6 to 22 February 2026.[126]At the142nd IOC Sessionin July 2024, it was confirmed that the2030 Winter Olympicswill be hosted by France in theFrench Alps.[127]The2034 Winter Olympicswas also awarded to be hosted by the United States inUtah; the state previously hosted the 2002 Olympics inSalt Lake City.[128]

## Controversy
The process for awarding host city honours came under intense scrutiny afterSalt Lake Cityhad been awarded the right to host the 2002 Games.[129]Soon after the host city had been announced it was discovered that the organisers had engaged in an elaborate briberyschemeto curry favour with IOC officials.[129]Gifts and other financial considerations were given to those who would evaluate and vote on Salt Lake City's bid. These gifts included medical treatment for relatives, a college scholarship for one member's son and a land deal in Utah. Even IOC presidentJuan Antonio Samaranchreceived two rifles valued at $2,000. Samaranch defended the gift as inconsequential since, as president, he was a non-voting member.[130]
The subsequentUnited States Department of Justiceinvestigation uncovered inconsistencies in the bids for every Olympics (both Summer and Winter) since 1988.[131]For example, the gifts received by IOC members from the Japanese Organising Committee for Nagano's bid for the1998 Winter Olympicswere described by the investigation committee as "astronomical".[132]Although nothing strictly illegal had been done, the IOC feared that corporate sponsors would lose faith in the integrity of the process and that the Olympic brand would be tarnished to such an extent that advertisers would begin to pull their support.[133]
The investigation resulted in the expulsion of 10 IOC members and the sanctioning of another 10. New terms and age limits were established for IOC membership, and 15 former Olympic athletes were added to the committee. Stricter rules for future bids were imposed, with ceilings imposed on the value of gifts IOC members could accept from bid cities.[134][135][136]

## Host city legacy
About eight years before the Winter Olympics, theIOCinvites National Olympic Committees to submit bids to host the games.[137]According to the IOC, the host city for the Winter Olympics is responsible for "...establishing functions and services for all aspects of the Games, such as sports planning, venues, finance, technology, accommodation, catering, media services, etc., as well as operations during the Games".[138]Due to the cost of hosting the Games, most host cities never realise a profit on their investment.[139]For example, the2006 Winter OlympicsinTurin, Italy, cost $3.6 billion to host. By comparison, the1998 Winter OlympicsinNagano, Japan, cost $12.5 billion.[140]The organisers of the Nagano Games claimed that the cost of extending thebullet trainservice from Tokyo to Nagano was responsible for the large price tag.[140]
The organising committee had hoped that the exposure gained from hosting the Winter Olympics, and the improved access to Nagano from Tokyo, would benefit the local economy for years afterwards. In fact, Nagano's economy did experience a post-Olympic boom for a year or two, but the long-term effects have not materialised as anticipated.[140]The likelihood of heavy debt is a deterrent to prospective host cities, as well as the prospect of unused sports venues and infrastructure saddling the local community with upkeep costs with no appreciable post-Olympic value.[141]
The Winter Olympics has the added problem of the alpine events requiring a mountain location; the men's downhill needs an 800-metre altitude difference along a suitable course. As this is a focal event that is central to the Games, the IOC has previously not agreed to it taking place a long way from the main host city,[142]in contrast to the Summer Games, where sailing and horse sports have taken place more than 1,000 kilometres (620 mi) away. The requirement for a mountain location also means that venues such as hockey arenas often have to be built in sparsely populated areas with little future need for a large arena and for the hotels and infrastructure needed for all Olympic visitors. Due to cost issues, fewer and fewer cities are willing to host. Both theTorino 2006andVancouver 2010Games, which were hosted in countries where large cities are located close to suitable mountain regions, had lower costs since more venues, hotels and transport infrastructure already existed. In contrast, theSochi 2014games had large costs as most installations had to be built.
The IOC has tried to mitigate these concerns. Firstly, it has agreed to fund part of the host city's budget.[143]Secondly, the qualifying host countries are limited to those that have the resources and infrastructure to successfully host an Olympic Games without negatively impacting their region or nation; this rules out a large portion of the developing world.[144]Finally, any prospective host city is required to add a "legacy plan" to their proposal, with a view to the long-term economic and environmental impact that hosting the Olympics will have.[145]
Beginning with the2022 Winter Games, the IOC allowed greater distances between the alpine events and other events. TheOslo bidhad 220 kilometres (140 mi) to theKvitfjelldownhill arena, while eventual host Beijing had venues 220 km away from the city as well. For the 2026 Winter Games,Stockholm's unsuccessful bidproposed to hold the alpine event inÅre, 620 kilometres (390 mi) away by road, while the successful bid of 2026 has 410 kilometres (250 mi) betweenMilanandCortina.

## Doping
In 1967 the IOC began enacting drug testing protocols. They started by randomly testing athletes at the 1968 Winter Olympics.[146]The first Winter Games athlete to test positive for a banned substance wasAlois Schloder, aWest Germanhockey player,[147]but his team was still allowed to compete.[148]During the 1970s, testing outside of competition was escalated because it was found to deter athletes from using performance-enhancing drugs.[149]The problem with testing during this time was a lack of standardisation of the test procedures, which undermined the credibility of the tests. It was not until the late 1980s that international sporting federations began to coordinate efforts to standardise the drug-testing protocols.[150]The IOC took the lead in the fight against steroids when it established the independentWorld Anti-Doping Agency(WADA) in November 1999.[151][152]
The 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin became notable for a scandal involving the emerging trend ofblood doping, the use of blood transfusions or synthetic hormones such asErythropoietin(EPO) to improve oxygen flow and thus reduce fatigue.[153]The Italian police conducted a raid on theAustriancross-country ski team's residence during the Games where they seized blood-doping specimens and equipment.[154]This event followed the pre-Olympics suspension of 12 cross-country skiers who tested positive for unusually high levels ofhaemoglobin, which is evidence of blood doping.[153]
The 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi's Russian Doping Scandal has resulted in the International Olympic Committee to begin disciplinary proceedings against 28 (later increased to 46) Russian athletes who competed at the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia, acting on evidence that their urine samples were tampered with.[155][156][157][158][159]

## Cold War
The Winter Olympics were an ideological front in theCold Warsince theSoviet Unionfirst participated at the1956 Winter Games. It did not take long for the Cold War combatants to discover what a powerful propaganda tool the Olympic Games could be. The advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete" of theEastern Bloccountries further eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it put the self-financed amateurs of the Western countries at a disadvantage. TheSoviet Unionentered teams of athletes who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but many of whom were in reality paid by the state to train on a full-time basis.[46]Nevertheless, the IOC held to the traditional rules regarding amateurism until the '90s.[47]
The Cold War created tensions amongst countries allied to the two superpowers. The strained relationship between East and West Germany created a difficult political situation for the IOC. Because of its role in World War II, Germany was not allowed to compete at the 1948 Winter Olympics.[37]In 1950, the IOC recognised theWest German Olympic Committee, and invited East and West Germany to compete as a unified team at the 1952 Winter Games.[160]East Germany declined and instead sought international legitimacy separate from West Germany.[161]
In 1955, the Soviet Union recognised East Germany as a sovereign state, thereby giving more credibility to East Germany's campaign to become an independent participant. The IOC agreed provisionally to accept theEast German National Olympic Committeeon condition that East and West Germans compete as one team.[162]The situation became tense when theBerlin Wallwas constructed by East Germany in 1961 to stop migration of its citizens and Western European nations began refusing visas to East German athletes.[163]The uneasy compromise of a unified team held until the 1968 Grenoble Games when the IOC split the teams and threatened to reject host-city bids from any country that refused entry visas to East German athletes.[164]

## Boycott
The Winter Games have had only one national team boycott when Taiwan decided not to participate in the 1980 Winter Olympics held in Lake Placid. Prior to the Games, the IOC agreed to allow China to compete in the Olympics for the first time since 1952. China was given permission to compete as the "People's Republic of China" (PRC) and to use the PRC flag and anthem. Until 1980 the island of Taiwan had been competing under the name "Republic of China" (ROC) and had been using the ROC flag and anthem.[69]The IOC attempted to have the countries compete together but when this proved to be unacceptable the IOC demanded that Taiwan cease to call itself the "Republic of China".[165][166]
The IOC renamed the island "Chinese Taipei" and demanded that it adopt a different flag and national anthem, stipulations to which Taiwan would not agree. Despite numerous appeals and court hearings, the IOC's decision stood. When the Taiwanese athletes arrived at the Olympic village with their Republic of China identification cards they were not admitted. They subsequently left the Olympics in protest, just before the opening ceremonies.[69]Taiwan returned to Olympic competition at the 1984 Winter Games in Sarajevo as Chinese Taipei. The country agreed to compete under a flag bearing the emblem of their National Olympic Committee and to play the anthem of their National Olympic Committee should one of their athletes win a gold medal. The agreement remains in place to this day.[167]

## Sports
TheOlympic Charterlimitswinter sportsto "those sports which are practised on snow or ice".[168]Since 1992 a number of new sports have been added to the Olympic programme, which include short-track speed skating, snowboarding, freestyle and moguls skiing. The addition of these events has broadened the appeal of the Winter Olympics beyond Europe and North America. While European powers such as Norway and Germany still dominate the traditional Winter Olympic sports, countries such as South Korea, Australia and Canada are finding success in these new sports. The results are more parity in the national medal tables, more interest in the Winter Olympics, and higher global television ratings.[169]

## Demonstration events
Demonstration sportshave historically provided a venue for host countries to attract publicity to locally popular sports by having a competition without granting medals. Demonstration sports were discontinued after1992.[186]Military patrol, a precursor to thebiathlon, was a medal sport in 1924 and was demonstrated in 1928, 1936 and 1948, becoming an official sport in 1960.[187]Thespecial figuresfigure skating event was only contested at the1908 Summer Olympics.[188]Bandy(Russian hockey) is a sport popular in the Nordic countries and Russia. In the latter it is considered anational sport.[189]It was demonstrated at the Oslo Games.[190]
Ice stock sport, a German variant of curling, was demonstrated in 1936 in Germany and 1964 in Austria.[33]Theski balletevent, later known as ski-acro, was demonstrated in 1988 and 1992.[191]Skijöring, skiing behind dogs, was a demonstration sport in St. Moritz in 1928.[190]Asled-dog racewas held at Lake Placid in 1932.[190]Speed skiingwas demonstrated in Albertville at the 1992 Winter Olympics.[192]Winter pentathlon, a variant of themodern pentathlon, was included as a demonstration event at the 1948 Games in Switzerland. It includedcross-country skiing,shooting,downhill skiing,fencing, andhorse riding.[171]

## All-time medal table
The table below uses official data provided by theIOC:
Accurate as of2026 Winter Olympics

## Medal leaders by year
Number of occurrences